MSC4186: Simplified Sliding Sync (#4186)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md

Reviewer: Implementation requirements:

* [ ] Client (ideally multiple)
* [ ] Server

Reviewer 2: Current implementations to my knowledge:

* Client implementation: [matrix-rust-sdk](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-rust-sdk/) ([PR](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-rust-sdk/pull/3676))
* Server implementation: has been implemented in [Synapse](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/) across 10s of PRs. (Perhaps @MadLittleMods, the implementer, can give better link(s) here.)

Reviewer 3: #### Synapse server implementation

Maybe it's easiest to point to the main directories where the code lives:

 - [`element-hq/synapse` -> `synapse/rest/client/sync.py#L782`](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/59ad4b18fc81f373c57a7c7d09a2f340a129de76/synapse/rest/client/sync.py#L782)
 - [`element-hq/synapse` -> `synapse/handlers/sliding_sync/`](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/tree/59ad4b18fc81f373c57a7c7d09a2f340a129de76/synapse/handlers/sliding_sync)
  - [`element-hq/synapse` -> `tests/rest/client/sliding_sync/`](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/tree/59ad4b18fc81f373c57a7c7d09a2f340a129de76/tests/rest/client/sliding_sync)

The PRs between @MadLittleMods and @erikjohnston with the ~A-Sync label are also a pretty good encapsulation:

 - https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pulls?q=+is%3Apr+author%3AMadLittleMods+label%3AA-Sync
 - https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pulls?q=+is%3Apr+author%3Aerikjohnston+label%3AA-Sync

Author: In implementations we have `pos` as a query param, same as sync v2 (and v3 proposals). We might want to allow this to be in the request body, which would allow web clients to cache the preflight requests.

Currently, since `pos` changes for every request, every time the client does a sync request the browser will send a preflight request (as different query params mean that the browser consider it different resources). This means that we can't cache the preflight requests (via `Access-Control-Max-Age`)

# MSC4186: Simplified Sliding Sync

The current `/sync` endpoint scales badly as the number of rooms on an account increases. It scales badly because all
rooms are returned to the client, incremental syncs are unbounded and slow down based on how long the user has been

> offline, and clients cannot opt-out of a large amount of extraneous data such as receipts. On large accounts with

Reviewer 4: Specifically, I believe you can opt-out of receipts with `RoomFilter.ephemeral.not_types = [ "m.read.*" ]` or similar. When I was working on filtering support in grapevine, we had a fast path for filters like this that would skip reading any of the receipt data from the db server-side. That work hasn't been finished yet, and I have no idea if synapse has a similar fast-path.

One of the difficulties with v3 sync filtering in general is that performance can vary wildly wildly depending on server implementation details. The spec doesn't indicate which fast-paths should exist, and whether or not you hit a fast-path can also affect how many events are returned in the sync window (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/1887).

> offline, and clients cannot opt-out of a large amount of extraneous data such as receipts. On large accounts with

Author: Have removed

thousands of rooms, the initial sync operation can take tens of minutes to perform. This significantly delays the
initial login to Matrix clients, and also makes incremental sync very heavy when resuming after any significant pause in
usage.

Note: this is a “simplified” version of the sliding sync API proposed in
[MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575), based on paring back that API based
on real world use cases and usages.

# Goals

This improved `/sync` mechanism has a number of goals:

- Sync time should be independent of the number of rooms you are in.
- Time from launch to confident usability should be as low as possible.

> - Time from login on existing accounts to usability should be as low as possible.

Author: Yes, difference between opening the app when already logged in vs logging in. Will clarify

- Bandwidth should be minimized.
- Support lazy-loading of things like read receipts (and avoid sending unnecessary data to the client)
- Support informing the client when room state changes from under it, due to state resolution.
- Clients should be able to work correctly without ever syncing in the full set of rooms they’re in.
- Don’t incremental sync rooms you don’t care about.
- Servers should not need to store all past since tokens. If a since token has been discarded we should gracefully
  degrade to initial sync.

These goals shaped the design of this proposal.

> # Proposal

Reviewer 4: How does SSS interact with the ignored user list? In /v3/sync, the server omits events sent by ignored users, requiring the client to perform a second initial sync if they want to retroactively see messages when unignoring. The choice to do server-side ignored user filtering in sync also doesn't really simplify client implementation, because you still need client-side filtering for events received before the user was ignored.

My preference would be to drop this requirement entirely for SSS, now that we have a chance to do it in a backwards-compatible way.

Author: Current the Synapse implementation will strip out ignored users.

I think if we want to move away from stripping ignored users out then we would also need to do so in things like `/messages` to be useful. If we do want to do that change, I think it'd be better done in a separate MSC where we can figure things out properly. We can always do the change in a backwards compatible way by adding query params to indicate the API endpoints should return events from ignored users.

The core differences between sync v2 and simplified sliding sync are:

> - The server initially only sends the most recent N rooms to the client (where N is specified by the lcient), which then

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The server initially only sends the most recent N rooms to the client (where N is specified by the client), which then
```

  can paginate in older rooms in subsequent requests
- The client can configure which information the server will return for different sets of rooms (e.g. a smaller timeline
  limit for older rooms).
- The client can filter what rooms it is interested in

> - The client can maintain multiple sync loops (with some caveats)

Reviewer 6: Primarily for iOS which has 2 processes (a push process (NSE) and the main app process).

The basic operation is similar between sync v2 and simplified sliding sync: both use long-polling with tokens to fetch
updates from the server. I.e., the basic operation of both APIs is to do an “initial” request and then repeatedly call
the API supplying the token returned in the previous response in the subsequent “incremental” request.

## Lists and room subscriptions

The core component of a sliding sync request is “lists”, which specify what information to return about which rooms.
Each list specifies some filters on rooms (e.g. ignore spaces), the range of filtered rooms to select (e.g. the most
recent 20 filtered rooms), and the config for the data to return for those rooms (e.g. the required state, timeline

> limit, etc). The order of rooms is always done based on when the server received the most recent event for the room.

Reviewer 3: Yes, should [standardize this type of language](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/1334#issuecomment-2269948258).

```suggestion
limit, etc). The order of rooms is always done based on the arrival time of the most recent event for the room on the homeserver.
```

The client can also specify config for specific rooms if it has their room ID, these are known as room subscriptions.

Multiple lists and subscriptions can be specified in a request. If a room matches multiple lists/subscriptions then the
config is “combined” to be the superset of all configs (e.g. take the maximum timeline limit). See below for the exact

> algorithm.

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/9c5d08fff8d66a7cc0e2ecfeeb783f933a778c2f/synapse/rest/client/sync.py#L951-L955

Sticky lists can replace them yes, but I don't think that's been decided yet

request (e.g. for retries or to change parameters) the client *must* cancel the in-flight request and *not* process any
response it receives for it.

In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value in a response as the `since` param in exactly one request that
the client will process the response for. Clients must be careful to ensure that when processing a response any new
requests use the new `pos`, and any in-flight requests using an old `pos` are canceled.

The server cannot assume that a client has received a response until it receives a new request with the `since` token
set to the `pos` it returned in the response. The server must ensure that any per-connection state it tracks correctly
handles receiving multiple requests with the same `since` token (e.g. the client retries the request or decides to
cancel and resend a request with different parameters).

A server may decide to “expire” connections, either to free resources or because the server thinks it would be faster
for the client to start from scratch (e.g. because there are many updates to send down). This is done by responding with

> a 400 HTTP status and an error code of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

Reviewer 8: The description states that this is a server decision and most likely not a client error. This can be somehow misleading as a consumer. See https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc9110.html#status.400

If the server needs to free resources, it could return 429 for example. As a client developer, if I can't distinguish the error case, I would just start over when receiving a 400 with `M_UNKNOWN_POS`. That does maybe not help to free resources.

Also  `M_UNKNOWN_POS` indicates that there is most likely a logic error in the client implementation (position is unknown to the server). Using it as a „catch all“ is probably too broad.

At least I would like to have a differentiation between „the client did something wrong“ and „sever thinks that the client should start from the beginning“.

Author: It perhaps would be nice to inform the client if they had a logic error, but in practice its hard for the server to know without keeping information about all old positions around.

The only scenario of a client logic error that seems likely is if a client reuses an old position (e.g. due to restoring from a backup). 

Either way, restarting the sync connection is probably the right way to recover from this situation.

## List configuration

**TODO**, these are the same as in [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575):

- Required state format
- The filters
- Lazy loading of members
- Combining room config

## Room config changes

When a room comes in and out of different lists or subscriptions, the effective `timeline_limit` and `required_state`
parameters may change. This section outlines how the server should handle these cases.

If the `timeline_limit` *increases* then the server *may* choose to send down more historic data. This is to support the
ability to get more history for certain rooms, e.g. when subscribing to the currently visible rooms in the list to
precache their history. This is done by setting `unstable_expanded_timeline` to true and sending down the last N events
(this may include events that have already been sent down). The server may choose not to do this if it believes it has
already sent down the appropriate number of events.

If new entries are added to  `required_state` then the server must send down matching current state events.

> ## Extensions

Reviewer 4: My understanding is that this MSC doesn't have any support for timeline filtering. The SS MSC [called this out explicitly](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575/files#diff-1f7276cbbee4eeaaca06b07d2fe58312eab735259f2490e28e04710dde77fdccR1188), and it would probably be good to do that here as well. Timeline filtering on /v3/sync is used heavily by some bot and tool clients.

Reviewer 9: This thread needs resolving.

Author: Given this should be easy to add later, I've added a note to say we don't currently support it. 68f16e86

We anticipate that as more features land in Matrix, different kinds of data will also want to be synced to clients. Sync
v2 did not have any first-class support to opt-in to new data. Sliding Sync does have support for this via "extensions".
Extensions also allow this proposal to be broken up into more manageable sections. Extensions are requested by the
client in a dedicated extensions block.

In an effort to reduce the size of this proposal, extensions will be done in separate MSCs. There will be extensions
for:

- To Device Messaging \- MSC3885
- End-to-End Encryption \- MSC3884
- Typing Notifications \- MSC3961
- Receipts \- MSC3960
- Presence \- presence in sync v2: spec
- Account Data \- account\_data in sync v2: MSC3959
- Threads

**TODO** explain how these interact with the room lists, this is the same as in
[MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575)

> ## Request format

Reviewer 10: which of these are required and which optional?

```javascript
{
  "conn_id":  "<conn_id>",  // Client chosen ID of the connection, c.f. "Connections"

  // The set of room lists
  "lists": {
    // An arbitrary string which the client is using to refer to this list for this connection.
    "<list-name>": {

      // Sliding window ranges, c.f. Lists and room subscriptions

>       "ranges": [[0, 10]],

Reviewer 9: I think I'd be in favor of simplifying then. Especially with the workaround you mention.

      // Filters to apply to the list.
      "filters": {
        // Flag which only returns rooms present (or not) in the DM section of account data.
        // If unset, both DM rooms and non-DM rooms are returned. If false, only non-DM rooms
        // are returned. If true, only DM rooms are returned.
        "is_dm": true|false|null,

        // Flag which only returns rooms which have an `m.room.encryption` state event. If unset,
        // both encrypted and unencrypted rooms are returned. If false, only unencrypted rooms
        // are returned. If true, only encrypted rooms are returned.
        "is_encrypted": true|false|null,

        // Flag which only returns rooms which have an `m.room.encryption` state event. If unset,
        // both encrypted and unencrypted rooms are returned. If false, only unencrypted rooms
        // are returned. If true, only encrypted rooms are returned.

>         "is_invite": true|false|null,

Reviewer 11: documentation is copied across from `is_encrypted`

>         "is_invite": true|false|null,

Reviewer 12: How will knocks and left rooms be handled? Maybe this should be a string and be the current membership of the user?

        // If specified, only rooms where the `m.room.create` event has a `type` matching one
        // of the strings in this array will be returned. If this field is unset, all rooms are
        // returned regardless of type. This can be used to get the initial set of spaces for an account.
        // For rooms which do not have a room type, use 'null' to include them.
        "room_types": [ ... ],

        // Same as "room_types" but inverted. This can be used to filter out spaces from the room list.
        // If a type is in both room_types and not_room_types, then not_room_types wins and they are
        // not included in the result.
        "not_room_types": [ ... ],
      },

      // The maximum number of timeline events to return per response.

>       "timeline_limit": 10,

Reviewer 13: MSC3575 (at least its implementation inside the sliding sync proxy) allowed `timeline_limit` to be null. This is NOT the case with MSC4186 (as implemented inside Synapse). I believe the MSC should clarify this value is required.

      // Required state for each room returned. An array of event type and state key tuples.
      // Elements in this array are ORd together to produce the final set of state events
      // to return. One unique exception is when you request all state events via ["*", "*"]. When used,
      // all state events are returned by default, and additional entries FILTER OUT the returned set
      // of state events. These additional entries cannot use '*' themselves.
      // For example, ["*", "*"], ["m.room.member", "@alice:example.com"] will _exclude_ every m.room.member

>       // event _except_ for @alice:example.com, and include every other state event.

Reviewer 3: This behavior comes from the prior art in [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575).

Proposed alternative in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r1742194906 which is a lot more straight-forward :+1:

      // In addition, ["*", "*"], ["m.space.child", "*"] is an error, the m.space.child filter is not
      // required as it would have been returned anyway.

>       "required_state": [ ... ],

Reviewer 3: Clarify that `$LAZY` loading room members should also include any changed membership events in incremental syncs that are `limited: false` (regardless of whether the people are in the timeline).

Reference: https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/issues/17929

    }
  },

  // The set of room subscriptions
  "room_subscriptions": {
    // The key is the room to subscribe to.

>     "!foo:example.com": {

Reviewer 3: *Re-adding [this discussion](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575#discussion_r1638988556) from the other MSC3575:*

What should happen if you try to subscribe to a room you are not part of (or not allowed)?

The easy option would be to ignore it but then clients have no feedback about what they did wrong.

Perhaps entries in the `rooms` map could also have an `errcode`/`error` field. We could also just blow up the whole request with an error and point out which `room_id` is wrong although that isn't very machine-readable.

---

Can you subscribe to a public `world_readable` room that you're not part of?

Reviewer 3: This part of the MSC was [just removed as well](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186/commits/492db052d3e34449ee703dae31949ec887ad761e)

Everything needs clarification again.

      // These have the same meaning as in `lists` section
      "timeline_limit": 10,
      "required_state": [ ... ],
    }
  },

  // c.f. "Extensions"
  "extensions": {
  }
}
```

## Response format

```javascript
{
  // The position to use as the `since` token in the next sliding sync request.
  // c.f. Connections.
  "pos": "<opaque string>",

  // Information about the lists supplied in the request.
  "lists": {
    // Matches the list name supplied by the client in the request
    "<list-name>" {
      // The total number of rooms that match the list's filter.
      "count": 1234,
    }
  },

  // Aggregated rooms from lists and room subscriptions. There will be one entry per room, even if
  // the room appears in multiple lists and/or room subscriptions.

>   "rooms": {

Reviewer 3: Clarify which rooms should be showing up.

We want to return every room where the user has membership except rooms that the user has left themselves; unless "newly left" (left since the last incremental sync `pos` token) because we want everything that's *still* relevant to the user. We include "newly left" rooms because the last event that the user should see is their own `leave` event.

A `leave` != kick (leave events where the sender is not the same user). Kicks should always be included.

To say it another way, here is a list:

 - `join`
 - `invite`
 - `knock`
 - `ban`
 - Kicks (`leave` where the `sender` doesn't match the `state_key`)
 - Newly left rooms (`leave` membership that happened since the last incremental sync `pos` token)

Reviewer 9: Should you only include `ban` if there is a previous `join`, `invite`, or `knock`? :) (Maybe scope creep.)

Reviewer 3: I also had that in mind but I'm not sure (could go either way). It's kinda the same as an unsolicited invite (optionally followed by a kick/`ban`).

Ideally, we probably wouldn't show those kind of `ban`

Reviewer 7: That seems like a good idea, i've heard concerns of preemptive bans notifying the banned target that the room exists

Reviewer 5: How will [forgotten](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.13/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidforget) rooms be dealt with here? The old `/sync` doesn't seem to have a way to synchronize forgotten rooms across clients. It'd be nice if SSS could address this.

    "!foo:example.com": {

>       // The room name, if one exists. Only sent initially and when it changes.

Reviewer 3: Probably worth stating that this is strictly the value from the `m.room.name` event given the previous [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575) was previously trying to do a bunch of room name calculation stuff.

```suggestion
      // The room name (`m.room.name` -> `content.name`), if one exists. Only sent initially and when it changes.
```

>       "name": str|null,

Reviewer 3: It would be good to call out how all of these fields are optional if `initial: null` and they haven't changed

Reviewer 3: I guess the comments already state this and I just read past them :white_check_mark: 

> The room name, if one exists. Only sent initially and when it changes.

      // The room avatar, if one exists. Only sent initially and when it changes.
      "avatar_url": str|null,
      // The "heroes" for the room, if there is no room name. Only sent initially and when it changes.
      "heroes": [
        {"user_id":"@alice:example.com","displayname":"Alice","avatar_url":"mxc://..."},

>       ],

Reviewer 3: Do the `heroes` membership state events need to be included in `required_state` response when requesting `required_state: ["m.room.member", "$LAZY"]` (lazy-loading room members)?

Sync v2 says this:

> When lazy-loading room members is enabled, the membership events for the heroes MUST be included in the `state`, unless they are redundant. When the list of users changes, the server notifies the client by sending a fresh list of heroes. If there are no changes since the last sync, this field may be omitted.

But I think that's because `m.heroes` in Sync v2 is only a list of user ID's. Whereas, in the sliding sync response here, we already have all of the info necessary.

Reviewer 14: This thread hasn't been resolved.

My impression is that the answer to the question ("Do the `heroes` membership state events need to be included in `required_state` response") is "no", but I'm not certain of that.

In fact... it seems to be one of the "open questions" at the end of the proposal?

Author: Hero memberships may or may not also appear in `required_state` when using lazy loaded filters. It's a known issue that there is some duplication here, but the decision was made that it was good enough to leave it as is.

98ac3679

>       ],

Reviewer 3: One weird corner with the current spec: If the room doesn't have a name set and the user is invited/knock to the room, we don't have any `heroes` to provide here. This is because `heroes` membership isn't included in the stripped state that the server receives when they are invited/knocked over federation.

Related to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/380

This was solved for partial-joins via [MSC3943](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3943)

Not necessarily a blocker but just calling out something that won't work completely until that spec issue is solved.

Reviewer 14: @MadLittleMods Looks like this thread is informational and doesn't need further action?

Reviewer 3: Correct :+1: 

Created https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/2353 so this idea isn't lost

      // Flag which is set when this is the first time the server is sending this data on this connection.
      // When set the client must replace any stored metadata for the room with the new data. In
      // particular, the state must be replaced with the state in `required_state`.
      "initial": true|null,

      // Same as in sync v2. Indicates whether there are more events to fetch than those in the timeline.

>       "limited:" true|null,

Reviewer 11: Are the options in the request and response supposed to be in a union with `null`?

Isn't it the convention in the spec that the property is omitted entirely rather than given the value `null`? 

(For clarity, this is something that jumps out at me since frequently people don't realise omitting a property and giving the value null are distinct things in JSON. Again, I'm not sure what the convention is for the CS-API though.)

Reviewer 11: Hmm, seems like `limited` is already optional in the timeline portion of sync? https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/blob/7f2f100420a355cf8ea50d08329e6f98989fc975/data/api/client-server/definitions/timeline_batch.yaml#L15-L36

But this does not imply a union with `null` (it's not explicit). It could if there is another section of the specification that says something to the effect "all optional properties in responses and requests should be treated as though they are in a union with `null`" somewhere.

Reviewer 11: It might be better to rewrite this section using JSONSchema so that the intent is clearer in either case.

Reviewer 7: If they want to go with sticky params then null makes sense as a value, since clients will then leave it out on subsequent requests, and then the only way to unstick it is by explicitly sending null

>       "limited:" true|null,

Reviewer 3: Clarify what `limited` means when complicating it with gaps, newly joined, newly joined a room where you can't see the history, etc

Sync v2 in Synapse is a bit crazy with the logic probably because the spec isn't clear.

The existing definition seems accurate "Indicates whether there are more events to fetch than those in the timeline." Could maybe clarify that you can be `limited` if there is timeline gap and you stop at the gap and say `limited: true` so the client paginates over the gap themselves. And maybe also need to say that being newly joined doesn't factor in.

>       "limited:" true|null,

Reviewer 3: Clarify when to add `m.relations` in `unsigned` (`bundled_aggregation` logic).

Currently, it's done in Sync v2 and Sliding Sync when `limited: true` but @erikjohnston probably has the right inclination to not do it given that sync is returning new events and any relations to those events would come after it by their nature (and be in the response or the next one).

Reviewer 3: @erikjohnston unearthed some more context in [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2675) and relevant [Synapse PR](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/11478)

Author: Having bundled aggregation in sync seems odd. However, both Synapse and the [spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#aggregations-of-child-events) say to include bundled aggregations when `limited=true`. I think we should be consistent with sync v2, and clean things up in a different MSC if we want to do so.

      // Indicates if we have "expanded" the timeline due to the timeline_limit changing, c.f. Room config
      // changes above.
      "unstable_expanded_timeline": true|null,
      // The list of events, sorted least to most recent.
      "timeline": [ ... ],
      // The current state of the room as a list of events

>       "required_state": [ ... ],

Reviewer 3: On initial sync or the first time the room is send down the connection (when the room indicates `initial: true`), this is the full set of state requested in `required_state`.

On incremental sync (when the room indicates `initial: null`), this will only be the state that has changed since the last time you synced (since the `pos` token in the request).

>       "required_state": [ ... ],

Reviewer 3: We should call out that the `required_state`, `timeline`, `limited`, `num_live`, `prev_batch` fields will be omitted for `invite`/`knock` rooms. Only `invite_state`/`knock_state` is provided.

The reason these can't be included is because we don't have any of that information for remote invites and the user isn't participating in the room yet so we shouldn't leak anything to them. We can only rely on the information in the invite event.

Related previous conversation: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575#discussion_r1653045932

>       "required_state": [ ... ],

Reviewer 9: Thanks. I think this could be clearer.

      // The number of timeline events which have just occurred and are not historical.
      // The last N events are 'live' and should be treated as such.
      "num_live": 1,
      // Same as sync v2, passed to `/messages` to fetch more past events.
      "prev_batch": "...",

      // For invites this is the stripped state of the room at the time of invite
      "invite_state": [ .. ],

      // For knocks this is the stripped state of the room at time of knock

>       "knock_state": [ .. ],

Reviewer 15: As mentioned [in a comment below](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#issuecomment-2417104725) it would be super useful to have a separate field indicating the user's membership state in a room instead of relying on some rules around `required_state` and `invite_state` and finding the membership event in the client-side.

Also note the current simplified sliding sync version implementation in Synapse uses a single `invite_state` array instead of separate ones for invite and knock. I think it was discussed to rename it to `stripped_state` or something along the lines?

>       "knock_state": [ .. ],

Reviewer: There should also be a `knock_servers` field, copying https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4233

      // Whether the room is a DM room.
      "is_dm": true|null,

>       // An opaque integer that can be used to sort the rooms by "Bump Stamp"

Reviewer 16: u64 would be a problem, or at least an inconvenience, for JavaScript clients. Should this be an unsigned 53-bit integer instead?

      "bump_stamp": 1,

      // These are the same as sync v2.

>       "joined_count": 1,

Reviewer 13: Should be precised that `joined_count` is given only if the room has been joined. For invite room, this value will be missing.

      "invited_count": 1,
      "notification_count": 1,
      "highlight_count": 1,
    }
  },

  "extensions": {
  },
}
```

# Example usage

This section gives an example of how a client can use this API (roughly based on how Element X currently uses the API).

When the app starts up it configures a single list with a range of `[0, 19]` (to get the top 20 rooms) and a
`timeline_limit` of 1. This returns quickly with the top 20 rooms (or just the changes in the top 20 rooms if a token
was specified).

The client then increases the range (in the next request) to `[0, 99]`, which will return the next 80 rooms. The server
may sort the rooms differently than they are returned by the server (e.g. they may ignore reactions for sorting

> purposes).

Author: I'll make this clearer, but the idea is that 100 rooms are in scope due to `[0, 99]`, but we've already sent down the first 20 rooms and so they aren't sent down again

> purposes).

Author: Will add a note

so whether to increase or decrease the range.

An alternative is for the client to specify a `page_size`, where the server sends down at most `page_size` number of
rooms. If there are more rooms to send to the client (beyond `page_size`), then the client can request to "paginate" in
these missed updates in subsequent updates.

Since this would require client side changes, this should be explored in a separate MSC.

## Timeline event trickling

If the `timeline_limit` is increased then the server will send down historic data (c.f. "Room config changes"), which
allows the clients to easily preload more history in recent rooms.

This mechanism is fiddly to implement, and ends up resending down events that we have previously sent to the client.

A simpler alternative is to use `/messages` to fetch the history. This has two main problems: 1) clients generally want
to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

> We can also add a flag to disable attempting to backfill over pagination (to match the behaviour of the sync timeline).

Author: > And the proxy behavior was a [bug not a feature](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17503#discussion_r1718416282) (self-described)

Worth noting that the timeline trickling was a desired feature, albeit one that was regretted. The "bug" there was that the proxy set `initial: true` when it shouldn't have.

## `required_state` response format

The format of returned state in `required_state` is a list of events. This does now allow the server to indicate if a
"state reset" has happened which removed an entry from the state entirely (rather than it being replaced with another
event).

This is particularly problematic if the user gets "state reset" out of the room, where the server has no mechanism to
indicate to the client that the user has effectively left the room (the server has no leave event to return).

> We may want to allow special entries in the `required_state` list of the form

Reviewer 17: Surely this isn't a nice-to-have but a requirement, otherwise we end up back in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/1209

> `{"type": .., "state_key": .., content: null}` to indicate that the state entry has been removed.

Reviewer 11: This is pretty serious and I don't think you can leave it up to clients to figure out somehow. Since that requires client authors to both be extremely knowledgeable about how room state works and also write perfect code. The chances of both of those happening is slim. For example, I tried to write some code to track room state from legacy `/sync` (by also using `/state`) in Draupnir and it seems like I haven't even been able to do that right. https://github.com/Gnuxie/matrix-protection-suite/blob/main/src/StateTracking/StateChangeType.ts#L13-L64,  https://github.com/Gnuxie/matrix-protection-suite/blob/main/src/StateTracking/StateChangeType.ts#L83-L123.  This situation where a state event can be removed entirely isn't even accounted for.

# Security considerations

Care must be taken, as with sync v2, to ensure that only the data that the user is authorized to see is returned in the

> response.

Reviewer 3: This should be expanded to explain what this means.

In terms of state:

 - `join`: Access to all of the room state.
 - `invite`/`knock`: Can only derive state from the stripped state events in the event itself (`invite_room_state`, `knock_room_state`)
 - `leave`/`ban`: Depends on the previous membership.
     - If the previous membership was `join`, access to the state at the time of the `leave`/`ban` (historical state)
     - If the previous membership was `invite`, fallback to the stripped state on the invite event
     - If the previous membership was `leave`/`ban`, repeat this logic
     - If no previous membership, no access to anything.
 
In terms of timeline events, this probably depends solely on `m.room.history_visibility`

# Unstable prefix

> The unstable URL for simplified sliding sync is `/org.matrix.simplified_msc3575/sync`. The flag in `/versions` is

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
The unstable URL for simplified sliding sync is `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.simplified_msc3575/sync`. The flag in `/_matrix/client/versions` is
```

usage.

Note: this is a “simplified” version of the sliding sync API proposed in
[MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575), based on paring back that API based
on real world use cases and usages.

# Goals

This improved `/sync` mechanism has a number of goals:

- Sync time should be independent of the number of rooms you are in.
- Time from opening of the app (when already logged in) to confident usability should be as low as possible.
- Time from login on existing accounts to usability should be as low as possible.
- Bandwidth should be minimized.
- Support lazy-loading of things like read receipts (and avoid sending unnecessary data to the client)
- Support informing the client when room state changes from under it, due to state resolution.
- Clients should be able to work correctly without ever syncing in the full set of rooms they’re in.
- Don’t incremental sync rooms you don’t care about.
- Servers should not need to store all past since tokens. If a since token has been discarded we should gracefully
  degrade to initial sync.

These goals shaped the design of this proposal.

> 

Reviewer 18: It's not clear here whether this endpoint updates presence in the same way sync v3 does. Currently this is relied upon for accurate presence display, but clients using this mechanism won't be sending presence which is going to cause a bit of a split.

I feel like this was just omitted by accident, can we update the proposal?

# Proposal

The core differences between sync v2 and simplified sliding sync are:

- The server initially only sends the most recent N rooms to the client (where N is specified by the client), which then
  can paginate in older rooms in subsequent requests
- The client can configure which information the server will return for different sets of rooms (e.g. a smaller timeline
  limit for older rooms).
- The client can filter what rooms it is interested in
- The client can maintain multiple sync loops (with some caveats)
  - This is useful for e.g. iOS clients which have a separate process to deal with notifications, as well as allowing
    the app to split handling of things like encryption entirely from room data.

The basic operation is similar between sync v2 and simplified sliding sync: both use long-polling with tokens to fetch
updates from the server. I.e., the basic operation of both APIs is to do an “initial” request and then repeatedly call

> the API supplying the token returned in the previous response in the subsequent “incremental” request.

Reviewer 19: I plan to follow up with this in a later proposal, to not block this MSC (as it's already de-facto standard).

algorithm.

The server tracks what data has been sent to the client in which rooms. If a room matches a list or subscription that
hasn’t been sent down before, then the server will respond with the full metadata about the room indicated by `initial:
true`. If a room stops matching a list (i.e. it falls out of range) then no further updates will be sent until it starts
matching a list again, at which point the missing updates (limited by the `timeline_limit`) will be sent down. However,
as clients are now expected to paginate all rooms in the room list in the background (in order to correctly order and
search them), the act of a room falling out of range is a temporary edge-case.

## Pagination

Pagination is achieved by the client increasing the ranges of one (or more) lists.

For example an initial request might have a list called `all_rooms` specifying a range of `0..20` in the initial
request, and the server will respond with the top 20 rooms (by most recently updated). On the second request the client
may change the range to `0..100`, at which point the server will respond with the top 100 rooms that either a) weren’t

> sent down in the first request, or b) have updates since the first request.

Reviewer 3: We should also clarify that the rooms in the lists are sorted by the latest event in the room (`stream_ordering` in Synapse). This way clients receive all new events.

The `bump_stamp` (`stream_ordering` of certain bump event types) is simply for the client's convenience and doesn't affect the server-side sorting.

Clients can increase and decrease the ranges as they see fit. A common approach would be to start with a small window
and grow that until the range covers all the rooms. After some threshold of the app being offline it may reduce the
range back down and incrementally grow it again. This allows for ensuring that a limited amount of data is requested at
once, to improve response times.

## Connections

Clients can have multiple “connections” (i.e. sync loops) with the server, so long as each connection has a different
`conn_id` set in the request.

Clients must only have a single request in-flight at any time per connection (clients can have multiple connections by
specifying a unique `conn_id`). If a client needs to send another request before receiving a response to an in-flight
request (e.g. for retries or to change parameters) the client *must* cancel the in-flight request (at the HTTP level)
and *not* process any response it receives for it.

> In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value in a response as the `since` param in exactly one request that

Reviewer 20: What is "the `since` param"? MSC3575 uses a [`pos` query parameter](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/kegan/sync-v3/proposals/3575-sync.md#core), not `since`; this MSC does not define it as part of any API at all.

parameters may change. This section outlines how the server should handle these cases.

If the `timeline_limit` *increases* then the server *may* choose to send down more historic data. This is to support the
ability to get more history for certain rooms, e.g. when subscribing to the currently visible rooms in the list to
precache their history. This is done by setting `unstable_expanded_timeline` to true and sending down the last N events
(this may include events that have already been sent down). The server may choose not to do this if it believes it has
already sent down the appropriate number of events.

If new entries are added to  `required_state` then the server must send down matching current state events.

## Extensions

We anticipate that as more features land in Matrix, different kinds of data will also want to be synced to clients. Sync
v2 did not have any first-class support to opt-in to new data. Sliding Sync does have support for this via "extensions".
Extensions also allow this proposal to be broken up into more manageable sections. Extensions are requested by the

> client in a dedicated extensions block.

Reviewer 16: how should a client be aware of whether a given extension is supported by the server or not?

It seems Synapse currently omits extensions in the response object, if there is no new data for that extension.

But this makes it impossible for a client to distinguish between no data and an unsupported extension.

Reviewer 14: I think this is a matter that should be handled in the MSCs for the specific extensions. I think that, if we have a need to tell clients whether a given extension is available, we'll be able come up with some way to do it. AFAIK we don't have that need yet.

@reivilibre are you happy for us to resolve this thread?

Reviewer 14: Taking an executive decision and resolving this.

Reviewer 3: Continued in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4508#discussion_r3677651482

In an effort to reduce the size of this proposal, extensions will be done in separate MSCs. There will be extensions
for:

- To Device Messaging \- MSC3885
- End-to-End Encryption \- MSC3884
- Typing Notifications \- MSC3961
- Receipts \- MSC3960
- Presence \- presence in sync v2: spec
- Account Data \- account\_data in sync v2: MSC3959
- Threads

**TODO** explain how these interact with the room lists, this is the same as in

> [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575)

Reviewer 14: Since the extensions are in a different MSC, I think this comment is out of scope. 

I'm going to mark it resolved.

## Request format

```javascript
{

>   "conn_id":  "<conn_id>",  // Client chosen ID of the connection, c.f. "Connections"

Reviewer 21: [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575/files#diff-1f7276cbbee4eeaaca06b07d2fe58312eab735259f2490e28e04710dde77fdccR69) limits the `conn_id` to 16 chars. Does that restriction still apply? If the omission was intentional it should be noted. As a preference I favor the limitation, or at least some limitation, or simply using an integer for this.

        // For rooms which do not have a room type, use 'null' to include them.
        "room_types": [ ... ],

        // Same as "room_types" but inverted. This can be used to filter out spaces from the room list.
        // If a type is in both room_types and not_room_types, then not_room_types wins and they are
        // not included in the result.
        "not_room_types": [ ... ],
      },

      // The maximum number of timeline events to return per response.
      "timeline_limit": 10,

      // Required state for each room returned. An array of event type and state key tuples.
      // Elements in this array are ORd together to produce the final set of state events
      // to return. One unique exception is when you request all state events via ["*", "*"]. When used,
      // all state events are returned by default, and additional entries FILTER OUT the returned set
      // of state events. These additional entries cannot use '*' themselves.
      // For example, ["*", "*"], ["m.room.member", "@alice:example.com"] will _exclude_ every m.room.member
      // event _except_ for @alice:example.com, and include every other state event.

>       // In addition, ["*", "*"], ["m.space.child", "*"] is an error, the m.space.child filter is not

Reviewer 11: Wait what? So it's not possible to filter out all events from one type without giving a state key? e.g. `[["*", "*"], ["m.room.member", "*"]]`couldn't be used filter out all membership events?

      // required as it would have been returned anyway.

>       "required_state": [ ... ],

Reviewer 13: The spec should tell that all `required_states` from all lists and from all room subscriptions are unioned.

cc @erikjohnston
reference in Synapse: https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/caa2012154899688237b2b48fb2c02d78d2fff41/synapse/types/handlers/sliding_sync.py#L506

    }
  },

  // The set of room subscriptions
  "room_subscriptions": {
    // The key is the room to subscribe to.
    "!foo:example.com": {
      // These have the same meaning as in `lists` section
      "timeline_limit": 10,

>       "required_state": [ ... ],

Reviewer 13: Same as https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186/files#r1991345065.

    }
  },

  // c.f. "Extensions"
  "extensions": {
  }
}
```

## Response format

```javascript
{
  // The position to use as the `since` token in the next sliding sync request.
  // c.f. Connections.
  "pos": "<opaque string>",

  // Information about the lists supplied in the request.
  "lists": {
    // Matches the list name supplied by the client in the request
    "<list-name>" {
      // The total number of rooms that match the list's filter. Note that rooms can be in
      // multiple lists, so may be double counted.
      "count": 1234,
    }
  },

  // Aggregated rooms from lists and room subscriptions. There will be one entry per room, even if
  // the room appears in multiple lists and/or room subscriptions.
  "rooms": {
    "!foo:example.com": {
      // The room name (as specified by any `m.room.name` event), if one exists. Only sent initially
      // and when it changes.
      "name": str|null,
      // The room avatar, if one exists. Only sent initially and when it changes.
      "avatar_url": str|null,
      // The "heroes" for the room, if there is no room name. Only sent initially and when it changes.
      "heroes": [

>         {"user_id":"@alice:example.com","displayname":"Alice","avatar_url":"mxc://..."},

Reviewer 14: could you define the datatype for `heroes` a bit more explicitly? which fields are required, which optional?

Reviewer 13: for the record, the `user_id` is mandatory, all other fields are optional ([see the type in Ruma](https://docs.rs/ruma/latest/ruma/api/client/sync/sync_events/v5/response/struct.Hero.html))

Reviewer 14: That seems sensible to me, though I'm not sure that Ruma is authoritative here!

Reviewer 13: Absolutely not, but it matches the implementation inside Synapse at least ^^

      "initial": true|null,

      // Same as in sync v2. Indicates whether there are more events to fetch than those in the timeline.
      "limited:" true|null,
      // Indicates if we have "expanded" the timeline due to the timeline_limit changing, c.f. Room config
      // changes above.
      "unstable_expanded_timeline": true|null,
      // The list of events, sorted least to most recent.
      "timeline": [ ... ],
      // The current state of the room as a list of events. This is the full state if `initial`
      // state is set, otherwise it is a delta from the previous sync.
      "required_state": [ ... ],
      // The number of timeline events which have just occurred and are not historical.
      // The last N events are 'live' and should be treated as such.
      "num_live": 1,
      // Same as sync v2, passed to `/messages` to fetch more past events.
      "prev_batch": "...",

      // For invites this is the stripped state of the room at the time of invite
      "invite_state": [ .. ],

      // For knocks this is the stripped state of the room at time of knock
      "knock_state": [ .. ],

      // Whether the room is a DM room.
      "is_dm": true|null,

>       // An opaque integer that can be used to sort the rooms by "Bump Stamp"

Reviewer 16: This appears to be the only place in the document where the 'bump stamp' is mentioned. A definition would be beneficial.

There should at a minimum be an explanation of the semantics of this integer and its ordering.

as a nit: I'm not convinced it makes sense to call it 'opaque' on one hand and then claim it can be used for sorting on the other. I'd typically say something is 'opaque' if you never have to inspect its actual value, but for sorting this seems to be by definition not the case.

Reviewer 16: > I think it's just described as "opaque" to mean it should not be interpreted to derive some other info like if someone were to use a timestamp (simply a number to compare against other numbers). You can see the word "opaque" being thrown around in https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17395#discussion_r1666662697.

probably would be good to just say as much in clear words (I still think the word 'opaque' is a little abused here) — e.g. 'The bump stamp can be used to order rooms by their latest bumpable* activity, but the bump stamp has no other semantic meaning and must not be interpreted by the client for any purpose other than sorting.'

      "bump_stamp": 1,

      // These are the same as sync v2.
      "joined_count": 1,
      "invited_count": 1,
      "notification_count": 1,

>       "highlight_count": 1,

Reviewer 3: Should unread and highlight count even be here? Notification/highlight count can't even be done correctly for encrypted rooms and it's just extra work for us to calculate if clients ignore our flawed values anyway.

Reviewer 6: But they can be done in unencrypted rooms so would save a bunch of processing time?

Reviewer 3: Conversation also continued at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r2353016460

>       "highlight_count": 1,

Reviewer 6: Yes

    }
  },

  "extensions": {
  },
}
```

# Example usage

This section gives an example of how a client can use this API (roughly based on how Element X currently uses the API).

When the app starts up it configures a single list with a range of `[0, 19]` (to get the top 20 rooms) and a
`timeline_limit` of 1. This returns quickly with the top 20 rooms (or just the changes in the top 20 rooms if a token
was specified).

The client then increases the range (in the next request) to `[0, 99]`, which will return the next 80 rooms. The server

> may sort the rooms differently than they are returned by the server (e.g. they may ignore reactions for sorting

Reviewer 22: Was one of these 'server's meant to be 'client'?

that if the user clicks on one of the top rooms the app can immediately display a screens worth of history. (An
alternative would be to have a second list with a static range of `[0, 19]` and a `timeline_limit` of 20. The downside
is that the clients may use a different order for the room list and so always fetching extra events for the top 20 rooms
may return more data than required.)

The client can keep increasing the list range in increments to pull in the full list of rooms. The client uses the
returned `count` for the list to know when to stop expanding the list.

The client *may* decided to reduce the range back to `[0, 19]` (and then subsequently incrementally expand the range),
this can be done.

When the client is expecting a fast response (e.g. while expanding the lists), it should set the `timeout` parameter to
0 to ensure the server doesn't block waiting for new data. This can easily happen if the app starts and sends the first
request with a `since` parameter, if the client shows a spinner but doesn't set a timeout then the request may take a
long time to return (if there were no updates to return).

> 

Reviewer 14: This thread doesn't appear to have been addressed.

> 

Author: The example in question shows that the client quickly expands the list to include all rooms, and so this question isn't an issue.

If the client doesn't expand rooms and sets a range of `0..20`, then the only way to know if activity has happened outside that range is if we return exactly 20 rooms for that list. (Note that we order rooms by activity and not `bump_stamp` here)

> 

Reviewer 3: If someone just cares about updates, they don't necessarily want to paginate the entire list. Explaining what to look for could be useful even for understanding.

> 

Author: 52eec8f3

rooms. If there are more rooms to send to the client (beyond `page_size`), then the client can request to "paginate" in
these missed updates in subsequent updates.

Since this would require client side changes, this should be explored in a separate MSC.

## Timeline event trickling

If the `timeline_limit` is increased then the server will send down historic data (c.f. "Room config changes"), which
allows the clients to easily preload more history in recent rooms.

This mechanism is fiddly to implement, and ends up resending down events that we have previously sent to the client.

A simpler alternative is to use `/messages` to fetch the history. This has two main problems: 1) clients generally want
to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.
We can also add a flag to disable attempting to backfill over pagination (to match the behaviour of the sync timeline).

## `required_state` response format

> The format of returned state in `required_state` is a list of events. This does now allow the server to indicate if a

Reviewer 20: ```suggestion
The format of returned state in `required_state` is a list of events. This does not allow the server to indicate if a
```

> "state reset" has happened which removed an entry from the state entirely (rather than it being replaced with another

Reviewer 20: Isn't one option to send a room back with `initial: true` when the server detects a state reset? This forces the client to discard any state events it has previously received.

- Bandwidth should be minimized.
- Support lazy-loading of things like read receipts (and avoid sending unnecessary data to the client)
- Support informing the client when room state changes from under it, due to state resolution.
- Clients should be able to work correctly without ever syncing in the full set of rooms they’re in.
- Don’t incremental sync rooms you don’t care about.
- Servers should not need to store all past since tokens. If a since token has been discarded we should gracefully
  degrade to initial sync.

# Proposal

We add a new `POST` `/sync` API to replace the existing `GET` `/sync` API. Clients use the new API in a similar manner
to the old one; the client repeatedly calls `/sync` which will return with any new data.

See the API section below for the request and response schemas.

## Connections

Each request may include a `pos` token, and each response includes a `pos` token that can be used for subsequent
requests.

A "connection" (aka "sync loop") is a long-running set of sync requests where each new request uses the `pos` from the
previous request. Clients can have multiple connections with the server, so long as each connection has a different

> `conn_id` set in the request.

Author: Mmm, true. I'd use session but that is already overloaded.

> `conn_id` set in the request.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, I don't have a good suggestion unfortunately.

the request body if they cancel a request and send a new one with the same `pos`.

In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value from the last *processed* response as the `pos` parameter in
the next request. A `pos` from an older response MUST NOT be used again. Doing so may either result in missed data or
result in a fatal error response from the server.

The server cannot assume that a client has received a response until it receives a new request with the `pos` token set
to the `pos` it returned in the response. The server must ensure that any per-connection state it tracks correctly
handles receiving multiple requests with the latest `pos` token (e.g. the client retries the request or decides to cancel
and resend a request with different parameters). Once a server has seen a request with a given `pos`, the server may
clean up any per-connection state from before that `pos`.

A server may decide to "expire" connections, either to free resources or because the server thinks it would be faster
for the client to start from scratch (e.g. because there are many updates to send down). This is done by responding with

> a 400 HTTP status and an error code of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

Author: How this works in practice is that the client will see `M_UNKNOWN_POS`, clear any relevant data, and retry without a `pos` parameter.

The main advantage in doing it likes this is that it ensures that clients understand what has happened and has invalidated any caches it needs to. For example, it should clear the old rooms out of the room list so that users can tell that its out of date (i.e. after the first initial sync the room list would only contain the top 20 rooms while it goes and fetches more in the background).

The most obvious disadvantage is the wasted round-trip, which is potentially significant on high-latency connections. Though we do expect it to be relatively rare for a server to return a `M_UNKNOWN_POS` so this hopefully shouldn't matter much in practice.

The alternative is to annotate the responses to indicate that the `pos` was ignored. We already do have some capability of doing so by e.g. annotating `room` responses with `initial: true`. The main concern is that there is potentially a lot of subtlety to making it all work correctly, especially with lists and extensions.

ordering semantics).

Rooms that the user has been in but left are only included if the room was previously sent to the client in that
connection. Rooms the user has been kicked or banned from will always be included. We do not include rooms the user has
left to save bandwidth and general efficiency (as the user knows they've left), but we still include kicked and banned
rooms as a) this should be uncommon, and b) the user may not have seen that they've been kicked/banned from the room
otherwise.

A "list" is then a set of filters (e.g. only match invites, or DM rooms, etc) plus a "range" that indexes into the
*filtered* list of rooms. For example, a common list config would be no filters (i.e. all rooms) plus the range
`[0,19]`, which would cause the server to return the top 20 rooms (by activity).

Specifically, a room matches a given list if after filtering the server maintained list of rooms by the list's filters,
the room's index in the filtered list is within the list's range.

#### Activity ordering

Rooms are ordered by last activity, based on when the last event in the room was received by the server. The exact

> ordering is determined by the server implementation.

Author: Yup!

`[0,99]` and a timeline limit of 10, plus a list with range `[100, <MAX>]` and timeline limit `1`. This would cause the
server to return the most recent 10 events for rooms with recent activity, but only 1 event for older rooms (that the
user is unlikely to visit). If an older room that we previously only returned with one timeline event receives a new
event, we'll end up sending it down with not just the new event but the previous 10 events as well (despite having sent
the second to last event previously). If the room then drops below the threshold (and so has timeline limit of 1), and
then receives another update, the server MAY remember that it has already sent the previous 10 events and only return
the latest one.

#### Required state

Required state expansion works in a similar way. If a room has an expanded `required_state` then the server checks if
the room has any state that matches the new, but not the old, `required_state`. If so then that state is included in the
response. The server MAY chose not to send that state if the client has previously seen that state.

> [!Note]

> > Synapse currently does not return rooms with expanded state immediately, instead waits for the next update.

Author: FTR I think this is mainly an implementation bug, I don't think it is too bad to implement, as the underlying mechanics are the same as to handle changes in `timeline_limit`.

> > Synapse currently does not return rooms with expanded state immediately, instead waits for the next update.

Reviewer 14: @clokep are you happy for us to resolve this thread?

> > Synapse currently does not return rooms with expanded state immediately, instead waits for the next update.

Reviewer 9: I think it would be nice to include the ticket to the issue, but not a requirement.

| `room_subscriptions` | `{string: RoomSubscription}` | No | A map of room ID to room subscription information. Used to subscribe to a specific room. Sometimes clients know exactly which room they want to get information about e.g by following a permalink or by refreshing a webapp currently viewing a specific room. The sliding window API alone is insufficient for this use case because there's no way to say "please track this room explicitly". |
| `extensions` | `{string: ExtensionConfig}` | No | A map of extension key to extension config. Different extensions have different configuration formats. |

### `SyncListConfig`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `timeline_limit` | `int` | Yes | The maximum number of timeline events to return per response. The server may cap this number. |
| `required_state` | [RequiredStateRequest] | Yes | Required state for each room returned. |
| `ranges` | `[[int, int]]` | No | Sliding window ranges. If this field is missing, no sliding window is used and all rooms are returned in this list. Integers are *inclusive*. (This is a list of 2-tuples.) |

> | `filters` | `RoomFilter` | No | Filters to apply to the list before sorting. |

Author: Have renamed to make clearer

### `RoomFilter`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `is_dm` | `bool` | No | Flag which only returns rooms present (or not) in the DM section of account data.<br/><br/> If unset, both DM rooms and non-DM rooms are returned. If False, only non-DM rooms are returned. If True, only DM rooms are returned. |
| `spaces` | `[string]` | No | Filter the room based on the space they belong to according to `m.space.child` state events. <br/><br/> If multiple spaces are present, a room can be part of any one of the listed spaces (OR'd). The server will inspect the `m.space.child` state events for the JOINED space room IDs given. Servers MUST NOT navigate subspaces. It is up to the client to give a complete list of spaces to navigate. Only rooms directly mentioned as `m.space.child` events in these spaces will be returned. Unknown spaces or spaces the user is not joined to will be ignored. |
| `is_encrypted` | `[string]` | No | Flag which only returns rooms which have an `m.room.encryption` state event. <br/><br/> If unset, both encrypted and unencrypted rooms are returned. If `False`, only unencrypted rooms are returned. If `True`, only encrypted rooms are returned. |

> | `is_invite` | `bool` | No | Flag which only returns rooms the user is currently invited to. <br/><br/> If unset, both invited and joined rooms are returned. If `False`, no invited rooms are returned. If `True`, only invited rooms are returned. |

Reviewer 14: it's been renamed; resolving this thread.

| `room_types` | `[string \| null]` | No | If specified, only rooms where the `m.room.create` event has a `type` matching one of the strings in this array will be returned. <br/><br/> If this field is unset, all rooms are returned regardless of type. This can be used to get the initial set of spaces for an account. For rooms which do not have a room type, use `null` to include them. |
| `not_room_types` | `[string \| null]` | No | Same as `room_types` but inverted.<br/><br/> This can be used to filter out spaces from the room list. If a type is in both `room_types` and `not_room_types`, then `not_room_types` wins and they are not included in the result. |

> | `room_name_like` | `string` | No | Filter the room name. <br/><br/>Case-insensitive partial matching e.g 'foo' matches 'abFooab'. The term 'like' is inspired by SQL 'LIKE', and the text here is similar to '%foo%'. |

Reviewer 9: Yeah, is that possible? Is it implementation specific or just not supported.

> | `room_name_like` | `string` | No | Filter the room name. <br/><br/>Case-insensitive partial matching e.g 'foo' matches 'abFooab'. The term 'like' is inspired by SQL 'LIKE', and the text here is similar to '%foo%'. |

Reviewer 9: It is probably ok to be left to implementations.

| `not_tags` | `[string]` | No | Filter the room based on its room tags.<br/><br/> Takes priority over `tags`. For example, a room with tags A and B with filters `tags: [A]` `not_tags: [B]` would NOT be included because `not_tags` takes priority over `tags`. This filter is useful if your rooms list does NOT include the list of favourite rooms again. |

### Example request

```jsonc
{
    "conn_id": "main",

    // Sliding Window API
    "lists": {
        "foo-list": {
            "ranges": [ [0, 99] ],
            "required_state": {
                "include": [
                    {"type": "m.room.create", "state_key": ""},
                ],
                "lazy_members": true,
            },
            "timeline_limit": 10,
            "filters": {
                "is_dm": true
            },
        }
    },
    // Room Subscriptions API
    "room_subscriptions": {
        "!sub1:bar": {
            "required_state": { "include": [{}] },
            "timeline_limit": 10,
        }
    }
}
```

## Response Body

### Top-level

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |

> | `pos` | `string` | Yes | The next position token in the sliding window to request. |

Reviewer 3: We should document/consider `pos` token compatibility with other endpoints.

Currently, Synapse uses a [similar but incompatible token](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/769d30a247926dd90d9afe7f6afd65bdc605d465/synapse/types/__init__.py#L1287-L1301) format for Sliding Sync compared to any other endpoint. If compatibility is desired, we can always still work with this format and accept it on other endpoints and strip off the extra field.

### Motivating use case

@bnjbvr brings up an interesting use case: When the `timeline` is `limited`, it would be nice to have the option to query `/messages?dir=b&from=<prev_batch>&to=<pos>` for seamless pagination and avoid needing any deduplication heuristics/logic on the client.

Similarly, [MSC4308](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4308) already proposes that the `pos` token should be compatible with the `/thread_subscriptions` endpoint being proposed there for the same reason.

Reviewer 9: > Currently, Synapse uses a [similar but incompatible token](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/769d30a247926dd90d9afe7f6afd65bdc605d465/synapse/types/__init__.py#L1287-L1301) format for Sliding Sync compared to any other endpoint. If compatibility is desired, we can always still work with this format and accept it on other endpoints and strip off the extra field.

I think it is desired, it will be pretty confusing if it can't be re-used. @erikjohnston told me it _can_ be used on `/messages` though? Doesn't that mean it would work for other endpoints too?

| `rooms` | `{string: RoomResult}` | No | A map of room ID to room results. |
| `extensions` | `{string: ExtensionResult}` | No | A map of extension key to extension results. Different extensions have different result formats. |

### `SyncListResult`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `count` | `int` | Yes | The total number of entries in the list. |

### `RoomResult`

Not all fields will be returned depending on the user's membership in the room.

All fields in this section may be omitted. When `initial` is set to `false` then an omitted filed means that the field
remains unchanged from its previous value. When `initial` is set to `true` then an omitted field means that the field is
not set, e.g. if `initial` is true and `name` is not set then the room has no name. Care must be taken by clients to
ensure that if they previously saw that the room had a name, then it MUST be cleared if it receives a room response with
`initial: true` and no `name` field.

#### Common fields

These fields are always included no matter the membership.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |

Reviewer 9: What does bump mean though? That's the part I don't get.

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |

Reviewer 3: Activity that should *bump* the room up to the top of the room list.

It looks like this originates from the original Sliding Sync [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575)

> ```
> // Sticky. Allowlist of event types which should be considered recent activity
> // when sorting `by_recency`. By omitting event types from this field, clients
> // can ensure that uninteresting events (e.g. a profile rename) do not cause a
> // room to jump to the top of its list(s). Empty or omitted `bump_event_types`
> // have no effect—all events in a room will be considered recent activity.
> //
> // NB. Changes to bump_event_types will NOT cause the room list to be reordered;
> // it will only affect the ordering of rooms due to future updates.
> "bump_event_types": [ "m.room.message", "m.room.encrypted" ],
> ```

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |

Reviewer 9: So "activity rank" or something like that?

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |

Reviewer 14: Seems like we've stuck with `bump_stamp`. @clokep are you happy to resolve this thread?

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |

Reviewer 9: I think it is fine, I'm just still cranky about the name. Names are hard.

| `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if user not in room (for peeking). |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

#### Joined/left/banned

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `name` | `string` | No | Room name or calculated room name. |
| `avatar` | `string` | No | Room avatar |
| `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users. |

> | `is_dm` | `bool` | No | Flag to specify whether the room is a direct-message room (according to account data). |

Author: Hmm, in Synapse its only included if its set to `true`. Which makes sense, except it doesn't capture if it changes during a sync connection. My gut is that we leave it as is and require clients to look at account data to see the changes? Not entirely sure what is the right thing to do

> | `is_dm` | `bool` | No | Flag to specify whether the room is a direct-message room (according to account data). |

Reviewer 14: It looks like this has been clarified now. Will mark as resolved.

| `limited` | `bool` | No | True if there are more events since the previous sync than were included in the `timeline_events` field, or that the client should paginate to fetch more events.<br/><br/> Note that server may return fewer than the requested number of events and still set `limited` to true, e.g. because there is a gap in the history the server has for the room. <br/><br/>Absence means `false` |
| `num_live` | `int` | No | The number of timeline events which have just occurred and are not historical. The last `N` events are 'live' and should be treated as such.<br/><br/> This is mostly useful to e.g. determine whether a given `@mention` event should make a noise or not. Clients cannot rely solely on the absence of `initial: true` to determine live events because if a room not in the sliding window bumps into the window because of an `@mention` it will have `initial: true` yet contain a single live event (with potentially other old events in the timeline). |
| `joined_count` | `int` | No | The number of users with membership of join, including the client's own user ID. (same as sync `v2 m.joined_member_count`) |

> | `invited_count` | `int` | No |  The number of users with membership of invite. (same as sync v2 `m.invited_member_count`) |

Reviewer 14: @clokep looks like this thread is informational and doesn't need further action?

> | `invited_count` | `int` | No |  The number of users with membership of invite. (same as sync v2 `m.invited_member_count`) |

Reviewer 9: I was hoping for some insight into why we don't need that. 😄 Definitely not a blocker for this MSC though.

| `notification_count` | `int` | No | The total number of unread notifications for this room. (same as sync v2) |
| `highlight_count` | `int` | No | The number of unread notifications for this room with the highlight flag set. (same as sync v2) |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

> [!Note]

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 21: @clokep I found [a test for this](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-rust-sdk/blob/681863423c56a6a10c03747c1dce1520751037b8/testing/matrix-sdk-integration-testing/src/tests/sliding_sync/room.rs#L398) in the matrix-rust-sdk, leading me to believe it's implemented now. It's difficult for me to navigate Synapse due to complexity-wise and things. Should we call this a wrap 😇

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 9: No, if it is implemented then the text should be removed from here.

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 22: FTR I tried to implement this in https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/18290 as Element Web needs this.

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 14: @clokep are you happy to resolve this thread?

I don't love that we're speccing stuff that isn't implemented (shouldn't it be removed from the MSC?), and the existence of an unmerged, bitrotting MSC is doing little to encourage me. But I'm not going to block the MSC about it.

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 9: I'm a bit confused at why we're deferring threaded notifications to an extension, but not this... if we're not planning to use it.

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 6: Originally, MSC3575 allowed you to sort by notification count, and so this was intended to be a commonly used sort option. As a result, notification counts had to be included in the core protocol so clients could patchup E2EE rooms with correct notification counts which may reorder a subset of rooms.

We have since gone away entirely from the idea of servers providing notification counts (as seen by rust SDK calculating them client-side) which makes the rationale for them being in the core protocol much weaker.

----

That's the "why it is this way", but not the "should it be this way". From a bandwidth perspective, sending 0 counts for every room is awful. From a only-use-the-data-you-need perspective, if clients can happily calculate the count on their own then we shouldn't force server calculated counts down client's throats. As a result, I'm of the opinion that we should move the notification counts out to the same extension as threaded notifications. Given this MSC has diverged from Synapse anyway, this should be a trivial change?

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 14: Seems like we have removed notifications from the MSC, in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186/changes/c3111990a759cd54e8a8076aab355468852db5bd

sent down in the first request, or b) have updates since the first request.

Clients can increase and decrease the ranges as they see fit. A common approach would be to start with a small window
and grow that until the range covers all the rooms. After some threshold of the app being offline it may reduce the
range back down and incrementally grow it again. This allows for ensuring that a limited amount of data is requested at
once, to improve response times.

## Example usage

This section gives an example of how a client can use this API (roughly based on how Element X currently uses the API).

When the app starts up it configures a single list with a range of `[0, 19]` (to get the top 20 rooms) and a
`timeline_limit` of 1. This returns quickly with the top 20 rooms (or just the changes in the top 20 rooms if a token
was specified).

The client then increases the range (in the next request) to `[0, 99]`, which will return the next 80 rooms. The server
may sort the rooms differently than they are returned by the server (e.g. they may ignore reactions for sorting
purposes). Note: the range here matches 100 rooms, however we only send the 80 rooms that we didn't send down in the

> previous request.

Reviewer 9: I think it might be the other section that's "wrong" then. I'll try to make a suggestion.

# Alternatives

## Pagination

In practice, having the client specify the ranges to use for the lists is often sub-optimal. The client generally wants
to have the sync request return as quickly as possible, but it doesn't know how much data the server has to return and
so whether to increase or decrease the range.

An alternative is for the client to specify a `page_size`, where the server sends down at most `page_size` number of
rooms. If there are more rooms to send to the client (beyond `page_size`), then the client can request to "paginate" in
these missed updates in subsequent updates.

Since this may require substantial client side changes compared with the current implementation, this should be explored
separately.

## Timeline event trickling

If the `timeline_limit` is increased then the server will send down historic data (c.f. "Changing room configs"), which
allows the clients to easily preload more history in recent rooms.

This mechanism is fiddly to implement, and ends up resending down events that we have previously sent to the client.

A simpler alternative is to use `/messages` to fetch the history. This has two main problems: 1) clients generally want

> to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

Author: I think this is a UX perf thing: when a user opens the app they will *likely* click one of the top 10 or 20 rooms and so having those 10 or 20 rooms have pre-fetched history as quickly as possible reduces the number of times that a user will see a blank room when opened.

It's hard for e.g. web to do multiple concurrent `/messages` requests due to max in-flight request limits. Though certainly adding a flag to `/messages` to make it return quicker would help a bunch (and I think is being proposed in an MSC somewhere already)

> to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

Reviewer 9: Connection exhaustion makes sense, and I guess having a separate API that is bulk /messages is essentially this API so...

> to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

Reviewer 14: @clokep are you happy to resolve this comment?

> to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

Reviewer 9: I think these ideas have been added to the MSC at this point.

   trickling" section.</del>
1. <del>The request `required_state` field is a bit confusing and uses special strings (like `"*"` and `"$LAZY"`).</del>
1. Duplication between room response `heroes` and `required_state` when specifying `lazy_members`, e.g. should we drop
   `heroes` if we are returning membership events?
1. <del>Should the room response include the user's current membership? The client can always request it via
   `required_state`, but that may be wasted if the client doesn't need any other information from the member event.</del>
1. Should we remove the `highlight_count` and `notification_count` fields, given clients increasingly must calculate
   this themselves, and Synapse currently doesn't implement it nor does Element X use it.
1. Should we support subscribing to rooms the user is not a member of, i.e. peeking for world readable rooms.
1. Should we support timeline filtering?
1. <del>Should we move `pos`, and other URL params, into the request body? This would allow web clients to cache the CORS
   requests, rather than having to pre-flight each request.</del>

> 1. How do we make it so that the clients don't have to send up the same body each time?

Author: > Additionally, this forces servers to start tracking things on a per-connection level. Previously, you could have a simple, naive, and stateless Simplified Sliding Sync implementation that doesn't track per-connection state at all. You will just get duplicate data in the response which is even how we did things in Synapse before we started tracking per-connection state.
>
> The claim against this is that isn't a useful implementation but it's plenty good to work.

I just don't really see how useful that is in practice TBH. Yes, it was a nice stepping stone while implementing SSS in Synapse, but I am unconvinced that that is a good rationale for avoiding adding further per-connection state.

> 1. How do we make it so that the clients don't have to send up the same body each time?

Reviewer 23: Strongly seconding Hywan's comment.

> [MSC3575](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3575), based on paring back that API based on real
> world use cases and usages.

## High level overview

From a high level, sliding sync works by the client specifying a set of rules to match rooms (via "lists" and
"subscriptions"). The server will use these rules to match relevant rooms to the user, and return any rooms that have
had changes since the previous time the room was returned to the client. If no rooms have changes, the server will block
waiting for a change (aka long-polling, like sync v2).

By judicious use of lists and subscriptions the client can control exactly what data is returned when, and help ensure
that it doesn't request "too much" data at once (thus avoiding slow responses).

## Goals

During initial design, the following goals were taken into account:

- Sync time should be independent of the number of rooms you are in.
- Time from opening of the app (when already logged in) to confident usability should be as low as possible.
- Time from login on existing accounts to usability should be as low as possible.
- Bandwidth should be minimized.

> - Support lazy-loading of things like read receipts (and avoid sending unnecessary data to the client)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Support lazy-loading of things like membership and read receipts (and avoid sending unnecessary data to the client)
```

a 400 HTTP status and an error code of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

## Lists and subscriptions

Clients specify a set of rules that the server uses to determine which rooms the client is interested in receiving. A
room is returned in the response if all of the following conditions hold:
1. The user has permission to view the room (or some subset of information about it).
1. The room matches at least one of the rules in the request.
1. The room has either never been sent to the client on that connection before, or there have been updates to the room
   since the last time it was sent to the client.

This MSC specifies two types of rule: a "list" and a "subscription".

### Lists

Lists are the primary way of specifying the rooms the client is interested in. They operate against a sequence of rooms
for the user that the server maintains. This server list is, for each user, the set of rooms that the user either
joined, been invited, knocked on, left, or been kicked or banned from, sorted by recent activity (see below for exact
ordering semantics).

Rooms that the user has been in but left are only included if the room was previously sent to the client in that

> connection. Rooms the user has been kicked or banned from will always be included. We do not include rooms the user has
> left to save bandwidth and general efficiency (as the user knows they've left), but we still include kicked and banned

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
connection. Rooms the user has been kicked or banned from will always be included. We do not include rooms the user has
left themselves to save bandwidth and general efficiency (as the user knows they've left), but we still include kicked and banned
```

rooms as a) this should be uncommon, and b) the user may not have seen that they've been kicked/banned from the room
otherwise.

A "list" is then a set of filters (e.g. only match invites, or DM rooms, etc) plus a "range" that indexes into the
*filtered* list of rooms. For example, a common list config would be no filters (i.e. all rooms) plus the range
`[0,19]`, which would cause the server to return the top 20 rooms (by activity).

Specifically, a room matches a given list if after filtering the server maintained list of rooms by the list's filters,
the room's index in the filtered list is within the list's range.

#### Activity ordering

Rooms are ordered by last activity, based on when the last event in the room was received by the server. The exact

> ordering is determined by the server implementation.

Reviewer 14: I don't think that explaining *why* we have used a particular ordering is essential.

@MadLittleMods are you happy to resolve this thread?

> ordering is determined by the server implementation.

Reviewer 3: (don't want to resolve yet)

I think the reasoning is important so we can easily understand the factors as future decisions need to be made (not to make it reconstructible with enough archaeology).

> ordering is determined by the server implementation.

Author: 782a7458

> ordering is determined by the server implementation.

Reviewer 3: Still missing the root of the reason:

> This way clients receive all new events.
>
> *-- @MadLittleMods, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r2105301689*

> [!Important]
> Rooms are ***not*** ordered by "`bump_stamp`", a field returned in the room response.

### Subscriptions

Subscriptions are a rule that matches against a specified room ID, i.e. they allow the client to specify that a
given room should always be returned (if there are updates). This is useful if e.g. the user has opened the room and the
client always wants to get the latest data for that room.

The server MUST ensure that user has permission to see any information the server returns. However, the user need not be
in the room, e.g.clients can specify room IDs for world-readable rooms and they would be returned.

> [!Note]
> Synapse currently does not support subscribing to rooms that the user is not part of.

### Room config

> Each rule also specifies a "room config", used to configure what data to return for a room that matches the rule. The
> "room config" has two fields: the "timeline limit" and "required state". The "timeline limit" specifies the maximum
> number of events to return in the timeline section of a room, and the "required state" specifies what state to return.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each rule also specifies a "room config", used to configure what data to return for a room that matches the rule. The
"room config" has two fields: the `timeline_limit` and `required_state`. The `timeline_limit` specifies the maximum
number of events to return in the timeline section of a room, and the `required_state` specifies what state to return.
```

Doesn't change readability and makes it easy to `Ctrl + F`

the latest one.

#### Required state

Required state expansion works in a similar way. If a room has an expanded `required_state` then the server checks if
the room has any state that matches the new, but not the old, `required_state`. If so then that state is included in the
response. The server MAY chose not to send that state if the client has previously seen that state.

> [!Note]
> Synapse currently does not return rooms with expanded state immediately, instead waits for the next update.

## Extensions

For requesting data other than room events (such as account data or typing notifications), clients can use "extensions".
These are split out into separate sections to a) make it easier for clients to specify just what they need, and b) to make it easier to extend in the future.

Examples of extensions, which will be specified in future MSCs, are:
- To Device Messaging
- End-to-End Encryption
- Typing Notifications
- Receipts
- Presence
- Account Data

# API

The endpoint is a `POST` request with a JSON body to `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.simplified_msc3575/sync`.

## Request Body

### Top-level

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |

> | `conn_id` | `string` | No | An optional string to identify this connection to the server. Only one sliding sync connection is allowed per given conn_id (empty or not). |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `conn_id` | `string` | No | An optional string to identify this connection to the server. Only one sliding sync connection is allowed per given `conn_id` (empty or not). |
```

> | `pos` | string | No | Omitted if this is the first request of a connection. Otherwise, the `pos` token from the previous call to `/sync` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `pos` | string | No | Omitted if this is the first request of a connection (initial sync). Otherwise, the `pos` token from the previous call to `/sync` |
```

| `room_subscriptions` | `{string: RoomSubscription}` | No | A map of room ID to room subscription information. Used to subscribe to a specific room. Sometimes clients know exactly which room they want to get information about e.g by following a permalink or by refreshing a webapp currently viewing a specific room. The sliding window API alone is insufficient for this use case because there's no way to say "please track this room explicitly". |
| `extensions` | `{string: ExtensionConfig}` | No | A map of extension key to extension config. Different extensions have different configuration formats. |

### `SyncListConfig`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `timeline_limit` | `int` | Yes | The maximum number of timeline events to return per response. The server may cap this number. |
| `required_state` | `RequiredStateRequest` | Yes | Required state for each room returned. |
| `ranges` | `[[int, int]]` | No | Sliding window ranges. If this field is missing, no sliding window is used and all rooms are returned in this list. Integers are *inclusive*, and are 0-indexed. (This is a list of 2-tuples.) |

> | `filters` | `SlidingRoomFilter` | No | Filters to apply to the list before sorting. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `filters` | `SlidingRoomFilter` | No | Filters to apply to the list. |
```

It doesn't matter whether we filter before or after sorting.

### `RoomSubscription`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `timeline_limit` | `int` | Yes | Same as in `SyncListConfig` |
| `required_state` | `RequiredStateRequest` | Yes | Same as in `SyncListConfig` |

### `RequiredStateRequest`

Describes the set of state that the server should return for the room.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `include` | `[RequiredStateElement]` | No | The set of state to return (unless filtered out by `exclude`), if any. |
| `exclude` | `[RequiredStateElement]` | No | The set of state to filter out before returning, if any. |

> | `lazy_members` | `bool` | No | Whether to enable lazy loaded membership behaviour. Defaults to false. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `lazy_members` | `bool` | No | Whether to enable lazy loaded membership behaviour. Defaults to `false`. |
```

| `state_key` | `string` | No | The event state key to match. If omitted then matches all state keys. |

#### Lazy loaded memberships

Room members can be lazily-loaded by using the `lazy_members` flag is set. Typically, when you view a room, you want to
retrieve all state events except for `m.room.member` events which you want to lazily load. To get this behaviour, clients
can send the following:

This is (almost) the same as [lazy loaded
memberships](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#lazy-loading-room-members) in sync v2. When specified, the
server will return the membership events for:
1. All the senders of events in `timeline_events` unless previously returned. This ensures that the client can render
   all the timeline events without having to fetch more events from the server.
1. The target (i.e. `state_key`) of all membership events in `timeline_events`.
1. All membership updates since the last sync when `limited` is false (i.e. non-gappy syncs). This allows the client to
   cache the membership list without requiring the server to send all membership updates for large gaps.

> Memberships returned to the client due to `lazy_members` are *not* filtered by `exclude`.

Author: I think it's the option that makes the most sense? TBH I don't think it matters and you just have to make a call one way or the other on how they interact. In my head the include/exclude is one filter, and the lazy members is a different one.

I can't think of a use-case either way

> Memberships returned to the client due to `lazy_members` are *not* filtered by `exclude`.

Reviewer 3: I was probing if there was a reason. Sounds like there isn't a reason which is fine. Feels like we should write that down at-least.

I could also see how `lazy_members` feels like another `include` filter which is filtered out with `exclude`. This was my first inclination so they feel the same and probably prompted my questioning.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |
| `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if user not in room (for peeking). |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

> #### Joined/left/banned

Reviewer 3: See https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r1767493967

We should include that information ^

> #### Joined/left/banned

Author: Have updated to make clearer how to handle each case.

> #### Joined/left/banned

Author: Have updated the sections

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `name` | `string` | No | Room name or calculated room name. |
| `avatar` | `string` | No | Room avatar |

> | `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users. |

Author: Ah, good point. Have just linked to it.

### Example response

```jsonc
{
  "pos": "s58_224_0_13_10_1_1_16_0_1",
  "lists": {
      "foo-list": {
          "count": 1337,
      }
  },
  "rooms": {
      "!sub1:bar": {
          "name": "Alice and Bob",
          "avatar": "mxc://...",
          "initial": true,
          "required_state": [
              {
                "sender":"@alice:example.com",
                "type":"m.room.create",
                "state_key":"",
                "content": {}
              },
              ...
          ],
          "timeline": [
              {"sender":"@alice:example.com","type":"m.room.message", "content":{"body":"B"}},
              ...
          ],
          "prev_batch": "t111_222_333",
          "joined_count": 41,
          "invited_count": 1,
          "notification_count": 1,
          "highlight_count": 0,
          "num_live": 2,
          "membership": "join"
      },
      ...
  },
  "extensions": {}
}
```

# Common patterns

Below are some potentially common patterns that clients may wish to use.

## Paginating room list

Pagination of the room list is achieved by the client increasing the ranges of one (or more) lists.

> For example an initial request might have a list called `all_rooms` specifying a range of `[0,19]` in the initial
> request, and the server will respond with the top 20 rooms (by most recently updated). On the second request the client
> may change the range to `[0,99]`, at which point the server will respond with the top 100 rooms that either a) weren’t
> sent down in the first request, or b) have updates since the first request.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
For example an initial request might have a list called `all_rooms` specifying a range of `[0,19]` in the initial
request, and the server will respond with the top 20 rooms (by most recently updated). On the second request the client
may change the range to `[0,99]`, at which point the server will use the top 100 rooms and respond with the ones that either a) weren’t
sent down in the first request, or b) have updates since the first request.
```

Maybe this is clearer?

large or expensive to compute.

# Unstable prefix

The unstable URL for simplified sliding sync is `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.simplified_msc3575/sync`. The flag
in `/_matrix/client/versions` is `org.matrix.simplified_msc3575`.

# Appendix

## Open questions

1. <del>In the response should we specify which lists a room is part of?</del>
1. <del>Should `knock_state` and  `invite_state` use the same name in the room response, e.g. `stripped_state`?</del>
1. <del>In the room response how do we inform clients that a piece of state was deleted (rather than added/updated)?</del>
1. <del>We need to decide what to do with `unstable_expanded_timeline`. We can either rename it to `expanded_timeline`, or
   remove the functionality and replace it with a bulk `/messages` endpoint (for multiple rooms). See "Timeline event
   trickling" section.</del>
1. <del>The request `required_state` field is a bit confusing and uses special strings (like `"*"` and `"$LAZY"`).</del>
1. Duplication between room response `heroes` and `required_state` when specifying `lazy_members`, e.g. should we drop

>    `heroes` if we are returning membership events?

Reviewer 14: @MadLittleMods this seems to duplicate an existing thread (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r1745962353). Can we resolve this one?

>    `heroes` if we are returning membership events?

Reviewer 3: It was to point out the existing conversation on the topic. We can resolve this one and continue there :+1:

request before receiving a response to an in-flight request (e.g. for retries or to change parameters) the client *must*
cancel the in-flight request (at the HTTP level) and *not* process any response it receives for it. Clients MAY change
the request body if they cancel a request and send a new one with the same `pos`.

In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value from the last *processed* response as the `pos` parameter in
the next request. A `pos` from an older response MUST NOT be used again. Doing so may either result in missed data or
result in a fatal error response from the server.

The server cannot assume that a client has received a response until it receives a new request with the `pos` token set
to the `pos` it returned in the response. The server MUST ensure that any per-connection state it tracks correctly
handles receiving multiple requests with the latest `pos` token (e.g. the client retries the request or decides to cancel
and resend a request with different parameters). Once a server has seen a request with a given `pos`, the server may
clean up any per-connection state from before that `pos`.

> A server may decide to "expire" connections, either to free resources or because the server thinks it would be faster

Reviewer 21: Synapse folks, I tried to have a look and I couldn't find an implementation of this clause. I don't know my way around that well so forgive me if so, but if not can this be marked for needing implementation?

Author: We now expire connections in Synapse https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/19211

- Typing Notifications
- Receipts
- Presence
- Account Data

# API

The endpoint is a `POST` request with a JSON body to `/_matrix/client/v4/sync`.

## Request Body

### Top-level

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `conn_id` | `string` | No | An optional string to identify this connection to the server. Only one sliding sync connection is allowed per given `conn_id` (empty or not). |
| `pos` | string | No | Omitted if this is the first request of a connection (initial sync). Otherwise, the `pos` token from the previous call to `/sync` |
| `timeout` | int | No | How long to wait for new events in milliseconds. If omitted the response is always returned immediately, even if there are no changes. Ignored when no `pos` is set. |
| `set_presence` | string | No | Same as in sync v2, controls whether the client is automatically marked as online by polling this API. <br/><br/> If this parameter is omitted then the client is automatically marked as online when it uses this API. Otherwise if the parameter is set to “offline” then the client is not marked as being online when it uses this API. When set to “unavailable”, the client is marked as being idle. |

> | `lists` | `{string: SyncListConfig}` | No | Sliding window API. A map of list key to list information (`SyncListConfig`). The list keys should be arbitrary strings which the client is using to refer to the list.  <br/><br/> Max lists: 100. <br/> Max list name length: 64 bytes. |

Author: Bleurgh, no I suppose we don't want to allow null bytes. How do we normally specify such strings?

#### `RequiredStateElement`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `type` | `string` | No | The event type to match. If omitted then matches all types. |
| `state_key` | `string` | No | The event state key to match. If omitted then matches all state keys. |

#### Lazy loaded memberships

Room members can be lazily-loaded by using the `lazy_members` flag. Typically, when you view a room, you want to
retrieve all state events except for `m.room.member` events which you want to lazily load. To get this behaviour, clients
can send the following:

This is (almost) the same as [lazy loaded
memberships](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#lazy-loading-room-members) in sync v2. When specified, the
server will return the membership events for:
1. All the `senders` of events in `timeline_events`, excluding membership events that were previously returned. This
   ensures that the client can render all the timeline events without having to fetch more events from the server.
1. The target (i.e. `state_key`) of all membership events in `timeline_events`, excluding membership events previously
   returned.

> 1. All membership updates since the last sync when `limited` is false (i.e. non-gappy syncs). This allows the client to

Author: fea5bf82

| `is_encrypted` | `bool` | No | Flag which only returns rooms which have an `m.room.encryption` state event. <br/><br/> If unset, both encrypted and unencrypted rooms are returned. If `false`, only unencrypted rooms are returned. If `True`, only encrypted rooms are returned. |
| `is_invite` | `bool` | No | Flag which only returns rooms the user is currently invited to. <br/><br/> If unset, both invited and joined rooms are returned. If `False`, no invited rooms are returned. If `True`, only invited rooms are returned. |
| `room_types` | `[string \| null]` | No | If specified, only rooms where the `m.room.create` event has a `type` matching one of the strings in this array will be returned. <br/><br/> If this field is unset, all rooms are returned regardless of type. This can be used to get the initial set of spaces for an account. For rooms which do not have a room type, use `null` to include them. |

> | `not_room_types` | `[string \| null]` | No | Same as `room_types` but inverted.<br/><br/> This can be used to filter out spaces from the room list. If a type is in both `room_types` and `not_room_types`, then `not_room_types` wins and they are not included in the result. |

Reviewer 24: How would sending null here work with languages that don't distinguish between null/undefined?
ie. with Rory&::LibMatrix, I don't see a feasible way to use this, as either null is omitted, or null is always serialised where the value is well... null. There is no runtime way to change this behavior, unless you resort to hacks, which can incur quite a painful performance penalty.
Maybe we could consider using a magic value like `"$null"`, or a boolean field (`include_untyped_rooms` and `exclude_untyped_rooms`)?

Reviewer 20: I don't think the spec has to concern itself with implementations that don't implement JSON completely. Unlike e.g. large integers and floats, JSON null values are very well-defined, there's no reason the spec should avoid them (and anyway, I'm pretty sure it already defines semantics for null values in other places).

Reviewer 24: In this case i can jut type it as `string?` and send ie. `[null, "m.room.space"]`, but the same wouldn't apply if it were a singular property rather than an array (ie. `"room_type": null` isnt possible, i just dont serialise null values outside of arrays in the first place)

Reviewer 23: `null` and `undefined` have different semantics throughout this spec. For instance, the room name or room avatar updates are sent by the server. The server _needs_ a way to let the client know that a room name has been *removed*; so it does send `null` in the room's response part to indicate that, as far as I recall. But if the room name hasn't changed since the previous time, it may not send the field, aka it's `undefined`. This is one place where `null` and `undefined` have different semantics.

| `rooms` | `{string: RoomResult}` | No | A map of room ID to room results. |
| `extensions` | `{string: ExtensionResult}` | No | A map of extension key to extension results. Different extensions have different result formats. |

### `SyncListResult`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `count` | `int` | Yes | The total number of entries in the list. |

### `RoomResult`

Not all fields will be returned depending on the user's membership in the room.

All fields in this section may be omitted. When `initial` is set to `false` then an omitted field means that the field
remains unchanged from its previous value. When `initial` is set to `true` then an omitted field means that the field is
not set, e.g. if `initial` is `true` and `name` is not set then the room has no name. Care must be taken by clients to
ensure that if they previously saw that the room had a `name`, then it MUST be cleared if it receives a room response with
`initial: true` and no `name` field.

#### Common fields

These fields are always included no matter the membership.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | Yes | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). |

Reviewer 21: When a user is invited to a room and joins sometime later from a another client, that room gets lost in the rooms list. It has the appearance the app failed to sync the join until something is said.

Therefor my bump types now include `(m.room.member,$ME)`.

To be clear, the spec should explicitly state a bump type is all `m.room.member` events with yourself as the `state_key`

Reviewer 14: @erikjohnston do you intend to address this?

Author: We don't want to include your own membership as bump events as we specifically want to avoid display name changes from re-ordering the bump stamp. Ideally we'd want to be able to bump rooms that the user has explicitly joined (or left), but that is not something that can be easily done today.

We can revisit this when we find a better way of doing display name changes.

| `is_dm` | `bool` | No | Flag to specify whether the room is a direct-message room (according to account data). If absent the room is not a DM room. |
| `initial` | `bool` | No | Flag which is set when this is the first time the server is sending this data on this connection, or if the client should replace all room data with what is returned. Clients can use this flag to replace or update their local state. The absence of this flag means `false`. |
| `expanded_timeline` | `bool` | No | Flag which is set if we're returning more historic events due to the timeline limit having increased. See "Changing room configs" section. |
| `required_state` | `[Event\|StateStub]` | No | Changes in the current state of the room. <br/><br/> To handle state being deleted, the list may include a `StateStub` type (c.f. schema below) that only has `type` and `state_key` fields. The presence or absence of `content` field can be used to differentiate between the two cases. |

> | `timeline_events` | `[Event]` | No | The latest events in the room. May not include all events if e.g. there were more events than the configured `timeline_limit`, c.f. the `limited` field. <br/><br/> If `limited` is true then we include bundle aggregations for the event, as per sync v2. <br/><br/> The last event is the most recent. |

Reviewer 3: Clarify event order:

> 1. The first time a room is sent down `/sync` we use `paginate_room_events` to get a chunk of history for the client, this basically results in the same as if no history was sent down `/messages` was used.
> 2. We use `get_room_events_stream_for_rooms` to get all updates for rooms since the last `/sync`, which is in stream ordering.
>
> *-- @erikjohnston, https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17510#discussion_r1704155477*

More context: https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17510

Reviewer 23: Random question:

> The first time a room is sent down /sync we use paginate_room_events to get a chunk of history for the client, this basically results in the same as if no history was sent down /messages was used.

Does it mean that a sync response can now be waiting on a pagination which may backfill events from other servers, binding the response time to the federation request? or does it wait for a pagination response for a very small time, and in case the response didn't come, it will instead send a SSS response sooner, and include the backfill results in a subsequent SSS response?

Reviewer 3: :shrug: Feels like there is something missing.

When `initial: true` or `expanded_timeline: true`, the timeline events should be a linearized version of the DAG (partial ordering in the event graph) (like `/messages`).

Otherwise "in the order they were received by the server"

Related spec issue: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/1917

Author: > When `initial: true` or `expanded_timeline: true`, the timeline events should be a linearized version of the DAG (partial ordering in the event graph) (like `/messages`).
> 
> Otherwise "in the order they were received by the server"

Neither of these actually defines a single ordering. For DAG ordering you can have multiple different topological orderings, and for "received by server" can depend on what you mean by "server". If you have full active HA, then ordering can depend on which instance you hit, as each instance may receive events from other instances in different orders.

Reviewer 3: I understand but whatever the distinction is and how we want to describe it. Historical order vs stream order.

separately.

## Timeline event trickling

If the `timeline_limit` is increased then the server will send down historic data (c.f. "Changing room configs") with
`expanded_timeline` set, which allows the clients to easily preload more history in recent rooms.

This mechanism is fiddly to implement, and ends up resending down events that we have previously sent to the client.

A simpler alternative is to use `/messages` to fetch the history. This has two main problems: 1) clients generally want
to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.
We can also add a flag to disable attempting to backfill over pagination (to match the behaviour of the sync timeline).

Another alternative is to do one initial sync with a low `timeline_limit` and then another with the higher
`timeline_limit`. This is conceptually simple, though has the main downside of potentially duplicating a lot of data
(such as state). The approach also doesn't support the use case for having two lists so that rooms that bubble to the

> top of the room list automatically get expanded timelines.

Reviewer 14: @erikjohnston / @MadLittleMods can you, between you, update the state of this thread?

> top of the room list automatically get expanded timelines.

Author: @MadLittleMods:

> > The initial SSS with state won't necessarily include the memberships required to render the timeline events returned in the oneshot initial sync.
> 
> It seems like this would work: `"required_state": { "lazy_members": true }`

Which won't include the all the memberships needed for subsequent syncs, and so you also need to have lazy memberships on for the second initial sync, and you're now back to duplicating a bunch of state. I really do think it's fair to say there is no race-free way of doing two initial syncs that both a) doesn't have race conditions, and b) doesn't duplicate a bunch of state.

Take a some other state, e.g. pinned events. You want to include that in the initial sync so that you can render the room. If you don't include that in the second initial sync you risk missing updates to it (especially if, due to network conditions, there is a substantial lag between the first and second). If you do include it in the second initial sync you're now duplicating the state.

I.e. I think you either run into data races OR duplicating a lot of state.

---

@richvdh:

> @erikjohnston / @MadLittleMods can you, between you, update the state of this thread?

Given this is talking about potential downsides of an alternative, I don't think resolving this thread is a particular blocker.

1. <del>Should the room response include the user's current membership? The client can always request it via
   `required_state`, but that may be wasted if the client doesn't need any other information from the member event.</del>
1. Should we remove the `highlight_count` and `notification_count` fields, given clients increasingly must calculate
   this themselves, and Synapse currently doesn't implement it nor does Element X use it.
1. Should we support subscribing to rooms the user is not a member of, i.e. peeking for world readable rooms.
1. Should we support timeline filtering?
1. <del>Should we move `pos`, and other URL params, into the request body? This would allow web clients to cache the CORS
   requests, rather than having to pre-flight each request.</del>
1. How do we make it so that the clients don't have to send up the same body each time?

## TODOs

1. <del>If we're keeping the notification counts we should add `unread_thread_notifications`</del>
    - This should exist in the thread extension
1. We should add `knock_servers` as per MSC4233, if that lands.

## Changelog

Changes from the initial implementation of simplified sliding sync.

> 1. Add `set_presence` URL param.

Author: Ah yup, all query params have moved. This changelog entry was from before we moved everything to query params

to have the sync request return as quickly as possible, but it doesn't know how much data the server has to return and
so whether to increase or decrease the range.

An alternative is for the client to specify a `page_size`, where the server sends down at most `page_size` number of
rooms. If there are more rooms to send to the client (beyond `page_size`), then the client can request to "paginate" in
these missed updates in subsequent updates.

Since this may require substantial client side changes compared with the current implementation, this should be explored
separately.

## Timeline event trickling

If the `timeline_limit` is increased then the server will send down historic data (c.f. "Changing room configs") with
`expanded_timeline` set, which allows the clients to easily preload more history in recent rooms.

This mechanism is fiddly to implement, and ends up resending down events that we have previously sent to the client.

A simpler alternative is to use `/messages` to fetch the history. This has two main problems: 1) clients generally want
to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 9: This sounds like it needs to be incorporated into the MSC? What are the downsides of this? It seems fairly elegant.

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 3: > only supports the one use case.

What are the other use cases not covered?

`expanded_timeline`'s goal is to get more `timeline` messages

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 3: Looks like this is the use case (from the https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186/commits/ef197a4c32b5c9131a27f41b0a984ab59878d4da):

> The approach also doesn't support the use case for having two lists so that rooms that bubble to the
top of the room list automatically get expanded timelines.

You would just make another initial Sliding Sync request to get the messages again.

If it's only a few rooms, then it would be fine to use `/messages` as normal to fetch more timeline individually. But the whole point is that this use case covers fetching timeline for a bulk number of rooms so if you see a whole bunch of rooms bubble up, doing another initial Sliding Sync request covers this perfectly.

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 3: ### Seamless timeline

> But doing an initial sync _later_ means having to try and tie timelines together, e.g. if you do an initial sync for a room at the same time as another events comes down your sync loop, you need to make sure that that event does appear in the timeline and doesn't get "overwritten" by the initial sync (which may not include it). This doesn't feel particularly feasible to do reliably.

I already have notes about how to do this in https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17579#discussion_r1722579007 ->

While this describes a potential implementation for Element X which doesn't have offline support and throws away events, I think the same thing works generally.

> For the timeline stitching logic, the client can store the latest event in timeline before our initial sync, then find that event in the initial sync `timeline` events and spread backwards from that point. That way, the ongoing sync loop can still append to the end of the timeline and continue seamlessly.
> 
> So if we have a timeline `[103]` already on the client, we store `latest_event_id = 103`, do our initial sync which returns `[100, 101, 102, 103, 104]` and we splice/spread in only `[100, 101, 102, 103]` accordingly (drop any new events after the `latest_event_id` from the initial sync response). This makes it so that even if the ongoing sync loop sends `104` before or after our initial sync does, it still appends like normal and everything is in seamless order.
> 
> If there are so many new messages sent in the time between us storing the `latest_event_id` and the initial sync responding that we now have a gap, we can just throw away our initial sync events because we have enough events to fill up the timeline just from our normal ongoing sync loop.
> 
> ---
> 
> To be clear, the client doesn't need to be fancy about stitching:
> 
> If the client had more timeline like `[98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103]`, we store `latest_event_id = 103`, we start the initial sync, our ongoing sync loop races us and returns `104` which makes our timeline look like `[98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104]`. Then our initial sync responds with `[100, 101, 102, 103, 104]`, we find the `103` spot in the response to slice at and place it at the `103` spot in the client timeline leaving us with `[100, 101, 102, 103, 104]`
> 
> Pseudo code (maybe off-by-one errors):
> 
> ```py
> latest_event_id = 103
> 
> # do initial sync request
> 
> initial_sync_timeline = [100, 101, 102, 103, 104]
> event_index_in_response = initial_sync_timeline.index(latest_event_id)
> # Skip if we can't find the `latest_event_id` in the response.
> # This means there have been so many messages sent between the time we initially
> # made the initial sync and the response that this is no longer relevant.
> # We already have enough events to fill up the timeline from the normal
> # ongoing sync loop
> if event_index_in_response is None:
> 	return
> 
> event_index_in_client_timeline = client_timeline.index(latest_event_id)
> # Update the timeline
> client_timeline = initial_sync_timeline[0:event_index_in_response] + client_timeline[event_index_in_client_timeline:-1]
> ```
>
> *-- @MadLittleMods, https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17579#discussion_r1722579007*

By the nature of how `expanded_timeline` works ("send down the latest `N` events, even if some of those events have previously been sent"), duplicate events are an expected scenario for clients to handle. So handling seamless timeline is a pre-requisite for clients either way.

If you're referring to the problems that come from differing orders from `/sync` (`stream_ordering`) and `/messages (topological ordering), this is the exact same problem regardless of how we accomplish things (especially for offline-first clients that persist events).

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 3: ### `expanded_timeline` complication

> Are there any major downsides to timeline expansion? There is a lot of talk about how you could get nearly the same sort of effect via other mechanisms, but I don't see much concrete arguments _against_. Certainly it does complicate servers, but clients can entirely opt-out of using the mechanism.

Basically, these same arguments were made in favor of timeline trickling when it was twice as bad trying to overload the `limited` and `initial` fields. We now have a dedicated `expanded_timeline` field to turn this behavior from evil to baseline acceptable.

But we also have alternatives to avoid the complication altogether.

---

Clients can't opt out. With `expanded_timeline`, a client who wants to increase `timeline_limit` *for whatever reason* must take into account `expanded_timeline` to know whether they are seeing historical messages (no longer possible to be a dumb naive client).

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Author: @MadLittleMods:

> For the timeline stitching logic, the client can store the latest event in timeline before our initial sync, then find that event in the initial sync `timeline` events and spread backwards from that point. That way, the ongoing sync loop can still append to the end of the timeline and continue seamlessly.

That's not safe though, given that sync orderings can be different depending on which worker you hit.

> If you're referring to the problems that come from differing orders from `/sync` (`stream_ordering`) and `/messages` (topological ordering), this is the exact same problem regardless of how we accomplish things (especially for offline-first clients that persist events).

That's why we have tokens and clients *should* be using both `from` and `to` tokens in `/messages` to ensure that they get all the events within gaps. Once you start trying to overlay different orderings (via multiple `/sync`) you're vulnerable to subtle races and missing events.

Though there is a flaw here in that we don't have a good way of handling clients that cache events from previous sync connections. Ideally they'd deduplicate any events and always call `/messages` even if the timelines overlapped.

The expanded timeline and double initial sync both work as solutions because the timelines get fully replaced and future syncs will always return deltas based on what you got. Doing an initial sync after means you have a chunk of timeline but future syncs are not getting deltas from.

> Clients can't opt out. With `expanded_timeline`, a client who wants to increase `timeline_limit` _for whatever reason_ must take into account `expanded_timeline` to know whether they are seeing historical messages (no longer possible to be a dumb naive client).

That's fair for clients that use multiple timeline limits, though if we don't expand the timeline limit then it is also a bit odd: the client isn't getting the data it might expect in all cases. Either way, if clients don't want to deal with the "complexity" of `expanded_timeline` flag then it can avoid using multiple different timeline limits. They can either do the double initial sync, or wait for potential future MSCs to allow bulk `/messages`.

> Basically, these [same arguments](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/17503#discussion_r1697697828) were made in favor of timeline trickling even when it was twice as bad trying to overload the `limited` and `initial` fields. We now have a dedicated `expanded_timeline` field to turn this behavior from evil to baseline acceptable.
> 
> But we also have alternatives to avoid the complication altogether.

That linked thread is about the fact the proxy set `initial=True` and Synapse used `limited=True`, and was resolved by introducing `expanded_timeline` flag. Yes, the fact that the proxy used `initial=True` (which we think was a bug?) was pretty bad, but I wouldn't accidentally used the phrase "evil". 

Still, as I see it there are two main issues with the current proposal:
1. You duplicate some of the events. This is annoying, and it'd be nice if we could instead change the API shape so that sync could say "these events go at the back of this timeline chunk". This is still a problem with using multiple initial syncs.
2. Potential complexity for clients. This is a valid concern, though conceptually it's relatively straightforwards: if you see `expanded_timeline` set you *replace* (rather than add to) the current timeline chunk with what is returned. However this obviously may not be as straightforwards in practice depending on how the clients are designed.

But as you say, we have a baseline acceptable solution that is implemented and tested. We have some alternatives, though all with some downsides (e.g. doesn't support all use cases, is racy, or isn't specced/implemented yet). From my PoV it feels like the right thing to do is accept what we have and land it, the alternatives are stripping out the feature we have or further indefinitely delaying the MSC.

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Author: @bnjbvr 

> Even after re-reading the text of the MSC a few times, I don't understand the goal of the `expanded_timeline` flag; does it mean that there _might_ be duplicates? As noted in a previous comment in this thread, clients have to handle duplicates anyways (b/o the `timeline_limit` increasing use case to start with, and then to deduplicate results from /messages which used previously persisted pagination tokens). Maybe the `expanded_timeline` flag is a hint?

The idea is that you can tell the server to (try and) ensure the client has an appropriate amount of history automatically. The main example use is to have it so that the top 20 rooms automatically have more history, so that when users open the room they'll always have a screenful of messages, while only fetching one or two messages for the older rooms which are less likely to be opened. This behaviour can be mimicked by doing `/messages`, though this has generally  been slower to call (especially if you try and do 20 rooms at once), so the main advantage is speed.

The `expanded_timeline` is there to tell clients they should *replace* the current timeline chunk with what has come down sync, essentially. For example, if a room has three events `[A, B, C]` and initially the room is in a list with `timeline_limit=1` then the client would receive just `[C]`, if a new vent `D` came in and caused it to enter a list with `timeline_limit=20` then the server would return the room with `expanded_timeline=true` and events `[A, B, C, D]`.

> Overall, I'd love to see more guidance for clients, with respect to when is it better to expand the `timeline_limit`, or when is it better to use `room/ROOM_ID/messages` for back-paginations. For instance, if a client wants to compute the unread status of a room, then, because of e2ee rooms, they may have to back-paginate up to the previous read receipt target event (if there's a gap in the timeline). In this case: should we rather use `room/ROOM_ID/messages` (and send one request for _each_ room), or use custom lists with an expanded `timeline_limit` (the naivest way being increasing the `timeline_limit` for _all_ rooms)?

Yeah, I think the guidance would be basically to use different `timeline_limit` with different lists, but otherwise if you want to paginate you should be using `/messages`. While you *could* keep increasing the `timeline_limit`, you'd repeatedly get the same events down after each increase.

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 14: > From my PoV it feels like the right thing to do is accept what we have and land it, the alternatives are stripping out the feature we have or further indefinitely delaying the MSC.

I won't pretend to have understood everything in this thread, but this seems fair to me. I'm going to mark this thread resolved. /cc @MadLittleMods .

> We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.

Reviewer 3: At the very-least, the alternative needs to be accurately described. Tracked by https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r2408702270

## Room results

A room is returned in the response if it matches at least one rule, and either there is new data to return, or the room has
not previously been sent to the client.

See the API section below for exactly what is returned. A subset may be returned if the user does not have permission to
view the room, e.g. if they are invited but not yet joined to the room.

The server MUST NOT send any room information down that the user does not have permission to see. Specifically, the
server should only return rooms the user: is or has previously been joined to, is invited to (or rejected an invite to),
or has knocked on (or had a knock rejected).

In future MSCs, an exception *may* be added for rooms that are world readable and the user has subscribed to.

The number of events in the timeline and what state is returned depends on the "room config" specified in the rules that
the room matches from the request.  If a given room matches multiple rules and therefore multiple room configs, then the
room configs are combined (to be a superset) based on the rules below. The clients can also change room configs between

> requests, see below for the semantics.

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
requests: see ["Combining room configs"](#combining-room-configs) below for the semantics.
```

### Changing room configs

When a room matches one or more rules (i.e. is eligible to be returned in the sync response) that has previously been
returned to the client, the server checks whether the combined room config is different than when the room was last
eligible to be returned. If the new config has at least one field that is a superset of the previous config, then the
server handles the config differently.

#### Timeline events

Normally the timeline events returned are only the events that have been received since the last time the room was sent
to the client (i.e. only new events). However, if the `timeline_limit` has increased (to say `N`) and the server has not
previously sent down all of the latest `N` events on the connection, the server SHOULD send down the latest `N` events
even if *some* of the events have previously been sent. If the server does not know if it has sent down all events it
SHOULD send down the latest `N` events.

For example, say the latest events in the room are `A`, `B`, `C` and `D` (from earliest to latest), and the client has
previously seen `B`, `C` and `D` with a `timeline_limit` of 1. If the client increases the `timeline_limit` to 4 then

> the server SHOULD return `A`, `B`, `C` and `D`, but if the client increases it instead to 3 then server does not need to

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
the server SHOULD return `A`, `B`, `C` and `D`. If the client instead increased `timeline_limit` to 3, then the server would not need to
```

| `include` | `[RequiredStateElement]` | No | The set of state to return (unless filtered out by `exclude`), if any. |
| `exclude` | `[RequiredStateElement]` | No | The set of state to filter out before returning, if any. |
| `lazy_members` | `bool` | No | Whether to enable lazy loaded membership behaviour. Defaults to `false`. |

#### `RequiredStateElement`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `type` | `string` | No | The event type to match. If omitted then matches all types. |
| `state_key` | `string` | No | The event state key to match. If omitted then matches all state keys. <br/><br/> Note: it is possible to match a specific state key, for all event types, by specifying `state_key` but leaving `type` unset. |

#### Lazy loaded memberships

Room members can be lazily-loaded by using the `lazy_members` flag. Typically, when you view a room, you want to
retrieve all state events except for `m.room.member` events which you want to lazily load. To get this behaviour, clients
can send the following:

```jsonc
    {
        "required_state": {
            "include": [{}],  // An empty object matches everything
            "lazy_members": true
        }
    }

> ```

Reviewer 14: TODO: check

This is (almost) the same as [lazy loaded
memberships](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#lazy-loading-room-members) in `/v3/sync`. When specified,
the server will return the membership events for:
1. All the `senders` of events in `timeline_events`, excluding membership events that were previously returned. This
   ensures that the client can render all the timeline events without having to fetch more events from the server.
1. The target (i.e. `state_key`) of all membership events in `timeline_events`, excluding membership events previously
   returned.

> 1. All membership updates since the last sync when `limited` is false (i.e. non-gappy syncs). This allows the client to

Reviewer 14: todo: double-check

| `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if user not in room (for peeking). |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

#### Currently or previously joined rooms

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `name` | `string` | No | Room name or calculated room name. |
| `avatar` | `string` | No | Room avatar |

> | `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users. The same as the `m.heroes` section in the `/v3/sync` [specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary) |

Reviewer 14: It's not the same, because the format is different. Maybe you mean "the same users"?

```suggestion
| `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users: the same users as the `m.heroes` section in the [`/v3/sync` specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary) |
```

> | `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users. The same as the `m.heroes` section in the `/v3/sync` [specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary) |

Reviewer 14: I think we can resolve this thread.

> | `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users. The same as the `m.heroes` section in the `/v3/sync` [specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary) |

Reviewer 3: Another example of why heroes as an extension could be useful:

> [...] if a room had no avatar and we wanted to synthesize one from the heroes' avatars. But that hasn't come up in practice, and i would ignore it for now; it can be another MSC.
>
> *-- @ara4n, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r3030690707*

| `timeline_events` | `[Event]` | No | The latest events in the room. May not include all events if e.g. there were more events than the configured `timeline_limit`, c.f. the `limited` field. <br/><br/> If `limited` is true then we include bundle aggregations for the event, as per `/v3/sync`. <br/><br/> The last event in the list is the most recent. |
| `prev_batch` | `string` | No | A token that can be passed as a start parameter to the `/rooms/<room_id>/messages` API to retrieve earlier messages. |
| `limited` | `bool` | No | True if there are more events since the previous sync than were included in the `timeline_events` field, or that the client should paginate to fetch more events.<br/><br/> Note that server may return fewer than the requested number of events and still set `limited` to true, e.g. because there is a gap in the history the server has for the room. <br/><br/>Absence means `false` |

> | `num_live` | `int` | No | The number of timeline events which have "just occurred" and are not historical, i.e. that have happened since the previous sync request. The last `N` events are 'live' and should be treated as such.<br/><br/> This is mostly useful to e.g. determine whether a given `@mention` event should make a noise or not. Clients cannot rely solely on the absence of `initial: true` to determine live events because if a room not in the sliding window bumps into the window because of an `@mention` it will have `initial: true` yet contain a single live event (with potentially other old events in the timeline). |

Reviewer 14: Doesn't this make `expanded_timeline` redundant?

Reviewer 14: Ok. I wonder if it might be worth noting this in the text, but I don't feel strongly.

Reviewer 14: [not a blocking comment, feel free to resolve]

Reviewer 3: This was noted in the MSC via https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/commit/5255f81f3e08522913d20e5ed4a323cbbc73c987

| `joined_count` | `int` | No | The number of users with membership of join, including the client's own user ID. (same as `/v3/sync` `m.joined_member_count`) |
| `invited_count` | `int` | No |  The number of users with membership of invite. (same as `/v3/sync` `m.invited_member_count`) |
| `notification_count` | `int` | No | The total number of unread notifications for this room. (same as `/v3/sync`). <br/><br/> Does not included threaded notifications, which are returned in an extension. |
| `highlight_count` | `int` | No | The number of unread notifications for this room with the highlight flag set. (same as `/v3/sync`) <br/><br/> Does not included threaded notifications, which are returned in an extension. |

> [!Note]

> > Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

Reviewer 14: I don't love this at all. But I won't die on this hill.

In any case we have another thread about it (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r2353016460) and I'll resolve this duplicate.

#### Invite/knock/rejections

For rooms the user has not been joined to the client also gets the stripped state events. This is commonly the case for
invites or knocks, but can also be for when the user has rejected an invite.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `stripped_state` | `[StrippedState]` | Yes  | Stripped state events (for rooms where the user is invited). Same as `rooms.invite.$room_id.invite_state` for invites in `/v3/sync`. |

The reason the full fields from the previous section can't be included is because we don't have any of that information
for remote invites and the user isn't participating in the room yet so we shouldn't leak anything to them. We can only
rely on the information in the invite/knock/etc event.

> [!Note]
> Synapse currently may inadvertently return extra fields from the previous section.

> [!Note]
> Knock support hasn't been implemented in Synapse.

> ### `StrippedHero` type

Reviewer 14: why is this a `StrippedHero` rather than just a `Hero`, ooi?

Reviewer 14: I'd be in favour of renaming the type, otherwise it will get carried into the spec and confuse us forever, but 🤷

Reviewer 14: [not a blocking comment, feel free to resolve]

Reviewer 14: Resolved in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186/changes/2fcc60c39c8d36769db91e3b96ef66942489f216

   trickling" section.</del>
1. <del>The request `required_state` field is a bit confusing and uses special strings (like `"*"` and `"$LAZY"`).</del>
1. Duplication between room response `heroes` and `required_state` when specifying `lazy_members`, e.g. should we drop
   `heroes` if we are returning membership events?
1. <del>Should the room response include the user's current membership? The client can always request it via
   `required_state`, but that may be wasted if the client doesn't need any other information from the member event.</del>
1. Should we remove the `highlight_count` and `notification_count` fields, given clients increasingly must calculate
   this themselves, and Synapse currently doesn't implement it nor does Element X use it.
1. Should we support subscribing to rooms the user is not a member of, i.e. peeking for world readable rooms.
1. Should we support timeline filtering?
1. <del>Should we move `pos`, and other URL params, into the request body? This would allow web clients to cache the CORS
   requests, rather than having to pre-flight each request.</del>

> 1. How do we make it so that the clients don't have to send up the same body each time?

Reviewer 14: With the exception of "should we remove `highlight_count` and `notification_count`", I feel like the anser to most of these is just "let's just spec what we have".

Reviewer 14: I really feel like we ought to clarify the state of these "open questions" before we merge the MSC. I don't think that's very hard: maybe give each of the un-`<del>`-eted entries a quick bullet point saying something like "not supporting this for now, maybe in a future MSC".

Author: These were stale and I think captured in various discussion threads. They were mostly a way of me to remember where I had got up to with finalising the MSC.

Have removed the section in c2b465a8a3d0e114a709665265438a38fa506245

the request body if they cancel a request and send a new one with the same `pos`.

In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value from the last *processed* response as the `pos` parameter in
the next request. A `pos` from an older response MUST NOT be used again. Doing so may either result in missed data or
result in a fatal error response from the server.

The server cannot assume that a client has received a response until it receives a new request with the `pos` token set
to the `pos` it returned in the response. The server MUST ensure that any per-connection state it tracks correctly
handles receiving multiple requests with the latest `pos` token (e.g. the client retries the request or decides to cancel
and resend a request with different parameters). Once a server has seen a request with a given `pos`, the server may
clean up any per-connection state from before that `pos`.

A server may decide to "expire" connections, either to free resources or because the server thinks it would be faster
for the client to start from scratch (e.g. because there are many updates to send down). This is done by responding with
a 400 HTTP status and an error code of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

> A `pos` token can be used in `/messages` and `/relations` APIs.

Reviewer 14: @erikjohnston can we clarify this?

> A `pos` token can be used in `/messages` and `/relations` APIs.

Author: I've clarified that `pos` can be used in the same way as `next_batch` from `/v3/sync`.  The spec PR https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/pull/2357 tries to clarify this further in the spec itself.

"room config" has two fields: the `timeline_limit` and `required_state`. The `timeline_limit` specifies the maximum
number of events to return in the timeline section of a room, and the `required_state` specifies what state to return.

### Lists

Lists are the primary way of specifying the rooms the client is interested in. They operate against a sequence of rooms
for the user that the server maintains. This server list is, for each user, the set of rooms that the user either
joined, been invited, knocked on, left, or been kicked or banned from, sorted by recent activity (see below for exact
ordering semantics).

Rooms that the user has been in but left are only included if the room was previously sent to the client in that
connection. Rooms the user has been kicked or banned from will always be included. We do not include rooms the user has
left themselves to save bandwidth and general efficiency (as the user knows they've left), but we still include kicked
and banned rooms as a) this should be uncommon, and b) the user may not have seen that they've been kicked/banned from
the room otherwise.

> A "list" is then a set of filters (e.g. only match invites, or DM rooms, etc) plus a "range" that indexes into the

Reviewer 25: Do filters apply to banned/kicked rooms?

| `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if the does not a have a membership event in the room (for peeking). |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

#### Currently or previously joined rooms

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `name` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room name or calculated room name. `null` if room name has been removed c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname |
| `avatar` | `string` | No | Room avatar |

> | `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users: the same users as the `m.heroes` section in the [`/v3/sync` specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary). <br/><br/> Heroes are only included if the room name is not set. |

Author: How strongly do we feel like we should change the behaviour to not send heroes if there is a canonical alias?

> | `heroes` | `[StrippedHero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users: the same users as the `m.heroes` section in the [`/v3/sync` specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary). <br/><br/> Heroes are only included if the room name is not set. |

Reviewer 14: I think we should get on with speccing what we have. If someone feels strongly about this, it can be changed later.

> | `is_dm` | `bool` | No | Flag to specify whether the room is a direct-message room (according to account data). If absent the room is not a DM room. |

Reviewer 25: Presumably this should be sent in non-`initial` syncs if the corresponding account data field changes?

- Clients should be able to work correctly without ever syncing in the full set of rooms they’re in.
- Incremental sync responses should only include rooms that the user cares about.
- Servers should not need to store all past since tokens. If a since token has been discarded we should gracefully
  degrade to initial sync.

# Proposal

We add a new `POST` `/sync` API to replace the existing `GET` `/sync` API. Clients use the new API in a similar manner
to the old one; the client repeatedly calls `/sync` which will return with any new data.

See the API section below for the request and response schemas.

## Connections

Each request may include a `pos` token, and each response includes a `pos` token that can be used for subsequent
requests.

A "connection" (aka "sync loop") is a long-running set of sync requests where each new request uses the `pos` from the
previous request. Clients can have multiple connections with the server, so long as each connection has a different
`conn_id` set in the request. The `conn_id` is scoped to that user and device.

Clients must only have a single active request in-flight at any time per connection. If a client needs to send another

> request before receiving a response to an in-flight request (e.g. for retries or to change parameters) the client *must*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
request before receiving a response to an in-flight request (e.g. for retries or to change parameters) the client MUST
```

> cancel the in-flight request (at the HTTP level) and *not* process any response it receives for it. Clients MAY change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cancel the in-flight request (at the HTTP level) and MUST NOT process any response it receives for it. Clients MAY change
```

the request body if they cancel a request and send a new one with the same `pos`.

> In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value from the last *processed* response as the `pos` parameter in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, a client MUST use the returned `pos` value from the last *processed* response as the `pos` parameter in
```

the next request. A `pos` from an older response MUST NOT be used again. Doing so may either result in missed data or
result in a fatal error response from the server.

The server cannot assume that a client has received a response until it receives a new request with the `pos` token set
to the `pos` it returned in the response. The server MUST ensure that any per-connection state it tracks correctly
handles receiving multiple requests with the latest `pos` token (e.g. the client retries the request or decides to cancel
and resend a request with different parameters). Once a server has seen a request with a given `pos`, the server may
clean up any per-connection state from before that `pos`.

A server may decide to "expire" connections, either to free resources or because the server thinks it would be faster
for the client to start from scratch (e.g. because there are many updates to send down). This is done by responding with
a 400 HTTP status and an error code of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

A `pos` token can be used in `/messages` and `/relations` APIs, in the same way as a `next_batch` from `/v3/sync`

> response.

Reviewer 2: In light of MSC4492, it would be worth specifying now that `pos` tokens are intended to be directionless.

Author: I think MSC4492 is a good illustration as to why I'm slightly nervous to spell out the exact properties. The intent here is that it works in the same as `/v3/sync`, and MSC4492 changes(/clarifies) the `/v3/sync` behaviour when/if it lands. Alternatively, we might decide MSC4492 isn't the right way forwards and tokens *should* encode direction, at which point we'd still want this MSC to align with `/v3/sync` behaviour.

Fundamentally, this MSC is not trying to change any behaviour around usages of tokens. We could add non-normative sections to remind people what the properties are at time of writing, but :shrug:

1. The user has permission to view the room (or some subset of information about it).
1. The room matches at least one of the rules in the request.
1. The room has either never been sent to the client on that connection before, or there have been updates to the room
   since the last time it was sent to the client.

This MSC specifies two types of rule: a "list" and a "subscription".

Each rule also specifies a "room config", used to configure what data to return for a room that matches the rule. The
"room config" has two fields: the `timeline_limit` and `required_state`. The `timeline_limit` specifies the maximum
number of events to return in the timeline section of a room, and the `required_state` specifies what state to return.

### Lists

Lists are the primary way of specifying the rooms the client is interested in. They operate against a sequence of rooms
for the user that the server maintains. This server list is, for each user, the set of rooms that the user either
joined, been invited, knocked on, left, or been kicked or banned from, sorted by recent activity (see below for exact
ordering semantics).

> Note that for rooms the user has been banned from, but never joined, should not be part of the list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that rooms the user has been banned from, but never joined, should not be part of the list.
```

Rooms that the user has been in but left are only included if the room was previously sent to the client in that
connection. Rooms the user has been kicked or banned from will always be included in the server list. We do not include

> rooms the user has left themselves to save bandwidth and general efficiency (as the user knows they've left), but we

Reviewer 2: > We do not include rooms the user has left themselves to save bandwidth and general efficiency (as the user knows they've left)

Only if they left the room via this specific device, right? Otherwise how would your other devices know you'd left a room?

Author: No, we don't track this per-device. If the other devices are doing incremental syncs they will see the leave, as per the previous sentence:

> Rooms that the user has been in but left are only included if the room was previously sent to the client in that connection.

This does have an edge case where if a client resets their connection, they won't know if the user has left a room until they sync the entire room list and see that it is missing. I'm not really sure what we can do about that in this API shape TBH

still include kicked and banned rooms as a) this should be uncommon, and b) the user may not have seen that they've been
kicked/banned from the room otherwise.

A "list" is then a set of filters (e.g. only match invites, or DM rooms, etc) plus a "range" that indexes into the
*filtered* list of rooms. For example, a common list config would be no filters (i.e. all rooms) plus the range
`[0,19]`, which would cause the server to return the top 20 rooms (by activity).

> Specifically, a room matches a given list if after filtering the server-maintained list of rooms by the list's filters,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifically, a room matches a given list if, after filtering the server-maintained list of rooms by the list's filters,
```

room configs are combined (to be a superset) based on the rules below. The clients can also change room configs between
requests: see ["Combining room configs"](#combining-room-configs) below for the semantics.

The data returned in the response is only the data that has changed, e.g. if the room name hasn't changed then the
`name` field will only be sent down the first sync with the room in it and not subsequently. Clients can detect if the
data returned is the full response or a delta based on the `initial` flag.

### Combining room configs

If a room matches multiple rules, and therefore multiple room configs, then the room configs must be combined into one
before being applied.

The fields are combined by taking the "superset", i.e.:
- `timeline_limit` — take the maximum timeline limit across all room configs.
- `required_state` — take the union of the required state fields, i.e. if a state event would be returned by any room
  config it is returned by the combined room config. This means that the combined config has `lazy_members` set to true
  if and only if a) any of the configs have `lazy_members` set to true AND b) no config which have `lazy_members`

>   disabled return all membership events.

Reviewer 2: nit: I'm struggling to parse "no config which have `lazy_members` disabled return all membership events."

Author: Hopefully ba83167a should clarify if:

> if and only if a) any of the configs have `lazy_members` set to true AND b) there are no configs that return all membership events (and don't have `lazy_members` set).

previously sent down all of the latest `N` events on the connection, the server SHOULD send down the latest `N` events
even if *some* of the events have previously been sent. If the server does not know if it has sent down all events it
SHOULD send down the latest `N` events.

For example, say the latest events in the room are `A`, `B`, `C` and `D` (from earliest to latest), and the client has
previously seen `B`, `C` and `D` with a `timeline_limit` of 1. If the client increases the `timeline_limit` to 4 then
the server SHOULD return `A`, `B`, `C` and `D`. If the client instead increased `timeline_limit` to 3, then the server
would not need to return any events as it knows the client already saw `B`, `C` and `D`.

If the server does return events that predate the last time the room was sent to the client, it MUST set the
`expanded_timeline` to `true`. (Note that one could infer this from `num_live`, however it is better to be explicit).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The server should return rooms that have expanded timelines immediately, rather than waiting for the next update to

> the room.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> the room.
```

   returned.
1. All membership updates since the last sync when `limited` is false (i.e. non-gappy syncs). This allows the client to
   cache the membership list without requiring the server to send all membership updates for large gaps. Caching is
   useful as it reduces the frequency that clients have to fetch the full membership list from the server, which needs
   to happen e.g. to send an encrypted message to the room. Note that clients can't rely on seeing membership changes in
   the `timeline` section to keep the current state up-to-date, due to state resolution.

   Note that the fact that membership updates are *not* necessarily sent when `limited` is true means that clients must
   flush any "membership" cache when `limited` is true. This is in contrast to Synapse's implementation of lazy-loading
   in `/v3/sync`.

If the client wants to always include a specific set of users, they can add a specific entry to the `include` list,
like:

```jsonc
    {
        "required_state": {
            "include": [{}, {"type":"m.room.member", "state_key":"@user:id"}],
            "lazy_members": true
        }
    }
```

> This can be used to always include the user's own `membership event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be used to always include the user's own membership event.
```

> [!Note]
> Unlike in `/v3/sync` the user's own membership event is not necessarily always included.

Memberships returned to the client due to `lazy_members` are *not* filtered by `exclude`. This is a somewhat arbitrary
decision as there aren't any known use cases for either filtering or not filtering lazy memberships.

#### Combining `required_state`

When combining room configs with different `required_state` fields the result must be the superset of them all. There
are two approaches server-side for handling this: a) keep the `required_state` separate and return any state that

> matches any of them, orb) merge the fields together, taking care to correctly account for configs that match against all

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
matches any of them, or b) merge the fields together, taking care to correctly account for configs that match against all
```

| `is_invited` | `bool` | No | Flag which only returns rooms the user is currently invited to. <br/><br/> If unset, both invited and joined rooms are returned. If `false`, no invited rooms are returned. If `true`, only invited rooms are returned. |
| `room_types` | `[string \| null]` | No | If specified, only rooms where the `m.room.create` event has a `type` matching one of the strings in this array will be returned. <br/><br/> If this field is unset, all rooms are returned regardless of type. This can be used to get the initial set of spaces for an account. For rooms which do not have a room type, use `null` to include them. |
| `not_room_types` | `[string \| null]` | No | Same as `room_types` but inverted.<br/><br/> This can be used to filter out spaces from the room list. If a type is in both `room_types` and `not_room_types`, then `not_room_types` wins and they are not included in the result. |
| `tags` | `[string]` | No | Filter the room based on its room tags.<br/><br/> If multiple tags are  present, a room can have any one of the listed tags (OR'd). |

> | `not_tags` | `[string]` | No | Filter the room based on its [room tags](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#room-tagging).<br/><br/> Takes priority over `tags`. For example, a room with tags A and B with filters `tags: [A]` `not_tags: [B]` would NOT be included because `not_tags` takes priority over `tags`. This filter is useful if your rooms list does NOT include the list of favourite rooms again. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `not_tags` | `[string]` | No | Filter the room based on its [room tags](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#room-tagging).<br/><br/> Takes priority over `tags`. For example, a room with tags A and B with filters `tags: [A]` `not_tags: [B]` would NOT be included because `not_tags` takes priority over `tags`. This filter is useful so a client's general room list does NOT include the list of favourite rooms again. |
```

| `is_dm` | `bool` | No | Flag to specify whether the room is a direct-message room (according to account data). If absent in an initial sync the room is not a DM room. Must be included in an incremental sync if the DM state changes. |
| `initial` | `bool` | No | Flag which is set when this is the first time the server is sending this data on this connection, or if the client should replace all room data with what is returned. Clients can use this flag to replace or update their local state. The absence of this flag means `false`. |
| `expanded_timeline` | `bool` | No | Flag which is set if we're returning more historic events due to the timeline limit having increased. See "Changing room configs" section. |
| `required_state` | `[Event\|StateStub]` | No | Changes in the current state of the room. <br/><br/> To handle state being deleted, the list may include a `StateStub` type (c.f. schema below) that only has `type` and `state_key` fields. The presence or absence of `content` field can be used to differentiate between the two cases. |

> | `timeline_events` | `[Event]` | No | The latest events in the room. May not include all events if e.g. there were more events than the configured `timeline_limit`, c.f. the `limited` field. <br/><br/> If `limited` is true then we include bundled aggregations for the event, as per `/v3/sync`. <br/><br/> The last event in the list is the most recent. |

Reviewer 21: | Implementation | timeline array | invited-room state field | stripped-state element type |
|---|---|---|---|
| MSC4186 schema | [`timeline_events`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L492) | [`stripped_state`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L507) | [`StrippedState`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L507), never defined |
| Synapse | [`timeline`](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/4e9f7757f17ba81b8747b7f8f9646d17df145aa3/synapse/rest/client/sync.py#L1012) | [`invite_state`](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/4e9f7757f17ba81b8747b7f8f9646d17df145aa3/synapse/rest/client/sync.py#L1043) | stripped events via [`strip_event`](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/4e9f7757f17ba81b8747b7f8f9646d17df145aa3/synapse/events/utils.py#L853) |
| Zendrite | [`timeline`](https://codefloe.com/pat-s/zendrite/src/commit/0878db55543ec51cad4b23c70bb8990e68fc9e56/syncapi/types/v4types.go#L281) | [both `invite_state` and `stripped_state`](https://codefloe.com/pat-s/zendrite/src/commit/0878db55543ec51cad4b23c70bb8990e68fc9e56/syncapi/types/v4types.go#L301-L302) | [`ClientEvent`](https://codefloe.com/pat-s/zendrite/src/commit/0878db55543ec51cad4b23c70bb8990e68fc9e56/syncapi/synctypes/clientevent.go#L63) |
| ruma (Tuwunel, Conduit, Continuwuity) | [`timeline`](https://github.com/ruma/ruma/blob/d82e91b17620ccc47a419eaef9376ba94144500c/crates/ruma-client-api/src/sync/sync_events/v5.rs#L614) | [`invite_state`](https://github.com/ruma/ruma/blob/d82e91b17620ccc47a419eaef9376ba94144500c/crates/ruma-client-api/src/sync/sync_events/v5.rs#L606) | [`AnyStrippedStateEvent`](https://github.com/ruma/ruma/blob/d82e91b17620ccc47a419eaef9376ba94144500c/crates/ruma-client-api/src/sync/sync_events/v5.rs#L606) |
| matrix-rust-sdk | consumes [`timeline`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-rust-sdk/blob/4bd5e819302ac5fd0cce86e2ec602a7540247dd5/crates/matrix-sdk-base/src/response_processors/timeline.rs#L185) | reads [`invite_state`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-rust-sdk/blob/4bd5e819302ac5fd0cce86e2ec602a7540247dd5/crates/matrix-sdk-base/src/response_processors/room/msc4186/mod.rs#L86) | `AnyStrippedStateEvent` via ruma |
| matrix-js-sdk | [`timeline`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/25c6171cb6a88ec7450472f8cf1a2d98823f2211/src/sliding-sync.ts#L100) | [`invite_state`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/25c6171cb6a88ec7450472f8cf1a2d98823f2211/src/sliding-sync.ts#L106) | [`IStrippedState`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/25c6171cb6a88ec7450472f8cf1a2d98823f2211/src/sync-accumulator.ts#L111) |

The schema names the timeline array `timeline_events`, but the [example](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L562) and every implementation use `timeline`; and `stripped_state` is typed `StrippedState`, a type the document never defines (only `StateStub` is). Aligning the schema with the example on the first, and defining `StrippedState` (or pointing to the `/v3/sync` stripped-state shape) on the second, would resolve both.

Separately, on the `invite_state` to `stripped_state` rename ([changelog #2](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L693)): Synapse and Element X still use `invite_state`, so Zendrite emits both (above) and notes in-source that the spec and the deployed clients disagree. Deciding which name servers should emit during the unstable period would let implementations converge instead of dual-emitting.

Author: > The schema names the timeline array `timeline_events`, but the [example](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L562) and every implementation use `timeline`

Oh good catch. This has come from confused naming internally in Synapse. 3695caad

> `StrippedState`, a type the document never defines (only `StateStub` is).

Ah yes, that is relying on the existing definition in the spec. We already point to `/v3/sync` in the comment for that field.

> Separately, on the `invite_state` to `stripped_state` rename ([changelog #2](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L693)): Synapse and Element X still use `invite_state`, so Zendrite emits both (above) and notes in-source that the spec and the deployed clients disagree. Deciding which name servers should emit during the unstable period would let implementations converge instead of dual-emitting.

We've basically taken the view that we're not going to update the unstable implementations, as the majority of the changes are cosmetic and accept that the request/response shapes differ depending on if you're using the unstable vs stable prefix.

| `joined_count` | `int` | No | The number of users with membership of join, including the client's own user ID. (same as `/v3/sync` `m.joined_member_count`) |
| `invited_count` | `int` | No |  The number of users with membership of invite. (same as `/v3/sync` `m.invited_member_count`) |

#### Invite/knock/rejections

For rooms the user has not been joined to the client also gets the stripped state events. This is commonly the case for
invites or knocks, but can also be for when the user has rejected an invite.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `stripped_state` | `[StrippedState]` | Yes  | Stripped state events (for rooms where the user is invited). Same as `rooms.invite.$room_id.invite_state` for invites in `/v3/sync`. |

The reason the full fields from the previous section can't be included is because we don't have any of that information
for remote invites and the user isn't participating in the room yet so we shouldn't leak anything to them. We can only
rely on the information in the invite/knock/etc event.

> [!Note]

> > Synapse currently may inadvertently return extra fields from the previous section.

Reviewer 2: Should this be removed? Has Synapse been fixed?
This won't make it into the spec PR anyhow.

Author: I think as a non-normative flag about where the current Synapse implementation diverges from the MSC is helpful here. We're not fixing up the Synapse implementation until after this MSC lands.

`expanded_timeline` set, which allows the clients to easily preload more history in recent rooms.

This mechanism is fiddly to implement, and ends up resending down events that we have previously sent to the client.

A simpler alternative is to use `/messages` to fetch the history. This has two main problems: 1) clients generally want
to preload history for multiple rooms at once, and 2) `/messages` can be slow if it tries to backfill over federation.

We could implement a bulk `/messages` endpoint, where the client would specify multiple rooms and `prev_batch` tokens.
We can also add a flag to disable attempting to backfill over pagination (to match the behaviour of the sync timeline).

Another alternative is to do one initial sync with a low `timeline_limit` and then another with the higher
`timeline_limit`. This is conceptually simple, though has the main downside of potentially duplicating a lot of data
(such as state). The approach also doesn't support the use case for having two lists so that rooms that bubble to the
top of the room list automatically get expanded timelines.

# Security considerations

> Care must be taken, as with `/v3/sync`, to ensure that only the data that the user is authorized to see is returned in

Reviewer 21: Thanks for getting this across the line; we have been implementing the core of this on the server side and the proposal has been clear to follow.

One gap we noticed while doing it: the [Connections section](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L48) establishes that `pos` is server-issued and [scoped to a `(user, device, conn_id)` connection](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L55), but neither that section nor Security considerations says what a server should do with a `pos` that was issued to a *different* user or device. The persisted per-connection state this API introduces is what makes that matter. With `/v3/sync` a [`next_batch`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/blob/68ffc62de3da55353cc9fd52cb0e775ee453c15c/data/api/client-server/sync.yaml#L159) is a stateless cursor, but here a `pos` selects a stored server-side connection, so a server that keys that lookup on the token alone, rather than on the authenticated user and device, could return another user's view.

Synapse already [guards against this](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/4e9f7757f17ba81b8747b7f8f9646d17df145aa3/synapse/storage/databases/main/sliding_sync.py#L418-L431): it keys the stored-connection lookup on the requester's user, device, and `conn_id`, and a `pos` that does not match returns `M_UNKNOWN_POS`, on the stated basis that the `pos` is a user-supplied value that has to be confirmed as actually theirs. So this is a request to write the existing behavior into the spec rather than a report of a live bug. The proposal already defines [`M_UNKNOWN_POS`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/c94e5681750b5ee3dd055ab5ad035bb5226bee4b/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L74) for an unrecognized `pos`, so the same error covers the not-yours case. Would it be worth Security considerations stating something like:

> Servers MUST reject a `pos` that was not issued to the requesting user and device, responding with `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

That keeps a from-scratch implementation from treating the token as a bearer capability. Clarifying ask, not a blocker on the FCP.

Author: Yes, that's a good point. Technically the MSC requires that the server only send down information the user is allowed to see, but there is definitely a potential footgun here.

I've made checking ownership of `pos` mandatory, and update the security considerations in 06bbf14b

1. The user has permission to view the room (or some subset of information about it).
1. The room matches at least one of the rules in the request.
1. The room has either never been sent to the client on that connection before, or there have been updates to the room
   since the last time it was sent to the client.

This MSC specifies two types of rule: a "list" and a "subscription".

Each rule also specifies a "room config", used to configure what data to return for a room that matches the rule. The
"room config" has two fields: the `timeline_limit` and `required_state`. The `timeline_limit` specifies the maximum
number of events to return in the timeline section of a room, and the `required_state` specifies what state to return.

### Lists

Lists are the primary way of specifying the rooms the client is interested in. They operate against a sequence of rooms
for the user that the server maintains. This server list is, for each user, the set of rooms that the user either
joined, been invited, knocked on, left, or been kicked or banned from, sorted by recent activity (see below for exact
ordering semantics).

> Note that for rooms the user has been banned from, but never joined, should not be part of the list.

Reviewer 3: *Lifting this out of a resolved discussion:*

> How will [forgotten](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.13/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidforget) rooms be dealt with here? The old `/sync` doesn't seem to have a way to synchronize forgotten rooms across clients. It'd be nice if SSS could address this.
>
> *-- @Johennes, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r1958686158*

Reviewer 6: That could be an extension I think. It's fairly uncommon for clients to want to know about forgotten rooms.

Author: Yeah, I think if we didn't have this for `/v3/sync` then we can leave this for a future MSC.

Specifically, a room matches a given list if after filtering the server-maintained list of rooms by the list's filters,
the room's index in the filtered list is within the list's range.

#### Activity ordering

Rooms are ordered by last activity, based on when the last event in the room was received by the server. The exact
ordering is determined by the server implementation. (Typically, this would be essentially based on when the server
received the last event in the room, however the precise definition depends on the server architecture, especially for
servers that are "distributed").

> [!Important]
> Rooms are ***not*** ordered by "`bump_stamp`", a field returned in the room response.

### Subscriptions

A subscription is a rule that matches against a specified room ID, i.e. they allow the client to specify that a given
room should always be returned (if there are updates). This is useful if e.g. the user has opened the room and the
client always wants to get the latest data for that room.

The server MUST ensure that user has permission to see any information the server returns. Currently, the user must

> either be in the room, or be invited/knocked to the room. Otherwise, the room will not be returned in the response.

Reviewer 3: @erikjohnston Looks sufficient :fast_forward: 

You kinda have to pull a lot out of those phrases compared to the more clear breakdowns linked above but good enough.

> either be in the room, or be invited/knocked to the room. Otherwise, the room will not be returned in the response.

Reviewer 14: @MadLittleMods can you mark this thread resolved if you are satisfied?

> either be in the room, or be invited/knocked to the room. Otherwise, the room will not be returned in the response.

Reviewer 3: I'm unable to mark anything resolved or unresolved :crying_cat_face:

> either be in the room, or be invited/knocked to the room. Otherwise, the room will not be returned in the response.

Reviewer 14: huh, sadness. Thanks, will resolve.

| `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if the does not a have a membership event in the room (for peeking). |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

#### Currently or previously joined rooms

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |

> | `name` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room name. `null` if room name has been removed c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname |

Reviewer 3: I was more thinking that the "c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname" was referring to the removed behavior as that's how this description evolved and is part of that sentence.

Could be considered good enough but a bit askew :fast_forward:

> | `name` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room name. `null` if room name has been removed c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname |

Reviewer 14: @MadLittleMods could you either make a concrete suggestion, or confirm that you are happy for this thread to be resolved?

> | `name` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room name. `null` if room name has been removed c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname |

Reviewer 3: "good enough" to resolve but there is room for improvement based on author appetite.

(I can't resolve/unresolve any threads)

the request body if they cancel a request and send a new one with the same `pos`.

In particular, a client must use the returned `pos` value from the last *processed* response as the `pos` parameter in
the next request. A `pos` from an older response MUST NOT be used again. Doing so may either result in missed data or
result in a fatal error response from the server.

The server cannot assume that a client has received a response until it receives a new request with the `pos` token set
to the `pos` it returned in the response. The server MUST ensure that any per-connection state it tracks correctly
handles receiving multiple requests with the latest `pos` token (e.g. the client retries the request or decides to cancel
and resend a request with different parameters). Once a server has seen a request with a given `pos`, the server may
clean up any per-connection state from before that `pos`.

A server may decide to "expire" connections, either to free resources or because the server thinks it would be faster
for the client to start from scratch (e.g. because there are many updates to send down). This is done by responding with

> a 400 HTTP status and an error code of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`.

Reviewer 3: Feels like we may need an unstable namespaced version of `M_UNKNOWN_POS`

It's only being returned by unstable endpoints but also feels wrong to use an identifier that could mean something else in the future.

Author: I don't follow the concern. We could add an unstable `M_UKNOWN_POS`... but then we'd still stabilise to `M_UNKNOWN_POS`?

We shouldn't have been using an un-namespaced error code in the implementation, but that ship has sailed.

Reviewer 3: > We shouldn't have been using an un-namespaced error code in the implementation

Exactly. We should have an unstable namespaced version of this error in the MSC *Unstable prefix* section

Author: But that ship has sailed, and I see little reason to add one now given a) we're so close to landing this MSC, and b) no client or server will ever use it.

   useful as it reduces the frequency that clients have to fetch the full membership list from the server, which needs
   to happen e.g. to send an encrypted message to the room. Note that clients can't rely on seeing membership changes in
   the `timeline` section to keep the current state up-to-date, due to state resolution.

   Note that the fact that membership updates are *not* necessarily sent when `limited` is true means that clients must
   flush any "membership" cache when `limited` is true. This is in contrast to Synapse's implementation of lazy-loading
   in `/v3/sync`.

> [!Note]
> Unlike in `/v3/sync` the user's own membership event is not necessarily always included.

Memberships returned to the client due to `lazy_members` are *not* filtered by `exclude`. This is a somewhat arbitrary
decision as there aren't any known use cases for either filtering or not filtering lazy memberships.

#### Combining `required_state`

When combining room configs with different `required_state` fields the result must be the superset of them all. There
are two approaches server-side for handling this: a) keep the `required_state` separate and return any state that

> matches any of them, or b) merge the fields together, however care must be taken to correctly account for configs that

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
matches any of them, or b) merge the fields together, taking care to correctly account for configs that
```

| `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if the does not a have a membership event in the room (for peeking). |
| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

#### Currently or previously joined rooms

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `name` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room name. `null` if room name has been removed c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname |

> | `avatar` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room avatar, `null` if avatar has been removed. |

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
| `avatar` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room avatar. `null` if avatar has been removed. |
```

| `joined_count` | `int` | No | The number of users with membership of join, including the client's own user ID. (same as `/v3/sync` `m.joined_member_count`) |
| `invited_count` | `int` | No |  The number of users with membership of invite. (same as `/v3/sync` `m.invited_member_count`) |
| `notification_count` | `int` | No | The total number of unread notifications for this room. (same as `/v3/sync`). <br/><br/> Does not included threaded notifications, which are returned in an extension. |
| `highlight_count` | `int` | No | The number of unread notifications for this room with the highlight flag set. (same as `/v3/sync`) <br/><br/> Does not included threaded notifications, which are returned in an extension. |

> [!Note]
> Synapse always returns 0 for `notification_count` and `highlight_count`

#### Invite/knock/rejections

For rooms the user has not been joined to the client also gets the stripped state events. This is commonly the case for

> invites or knocks, but can also be for when the user has rejected an invite.

Reviewer 2: > but can also be for when the user has rejected an invite.

Do we send [stripped state](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#stripped-state) in this case? I just tried this on element.io's Synapse (Element Web, legacy sync) and received the following upon rejecting an invite:

```json
    "rooms": {
        "leave": {
            "!WXeXzNuPzRWBdIFAEu:matrix.org": {
                "timeline": {
                    "events": [
                        {
                            "content": {
                                "membership": "leave"
                            },
                            "origin_server_ts": 1777399279402,
                            "sender": "@andrewm:element.io",
                            "state_key": "@andrewm:element.io",
                            "type": "m.room.member",
                            "unsigned": {
                                "membership": "leave",
                                "age": 482
                            },
                            "event_id": "$xFTj0wmffLtLTIsi95NsnN63C6ZXauyvozHmcbwl-a4"
                        }
                    ],
                    "prev_batch": "s30728648_1_1715_39292835_10382632_11164603_19362092_55065974_0_4013_2_1",
                    "limited": false
                },
                "org.matrix.msc4222.state_after": {
                    "events": []
                },
                "account_data": {
                    "events": []
                }
            }
        }
    }
```

and on the inviter's side:

```json
  "rooms": {
    "join": {
      "!WXeXzNuPzRWBdIFAEu:matrix.org": {
        "timeline": {
          "events": [
            {
              "content": {
                "membership": "leave"
              },
              "origin_server_ts": 1777399279402,
              "sender": "@andrewm:element.io",
              "state_key": "@andrewm:element.io",
              "type": "m.room.member",
              "unsigned": {
                "age": 0,
                "replaces_state": "$ZrBf3a9-Nk3XvojmAdINjArznS9cgHhF52WxQwozeno",
                "prev_content": {
                  "avatar_url": "mxc://element.io/6130836e26b462a6fe63d4e080dd9d2037490f2b",
                  "displayname": "Andrew Morgan (anoa) {he/him}",
                  "membership": "invite"
                },
                "prev_sender": "@anoa_test:matrix.org",
                "membership": "join"
              },
              "event_id": "$xFTj0wmffLtLTIsi95NsnN63C6ZXauyvozHmcbwl-a4"
            }
          ],
          "prev_batch": "s6917238234_757284974_34742186_4643209905_5404976888_269234723_1609866364_11294605636_0_677600_34_1",
          "limited": false
        },
        "state": {
          "events": [
            {
              "content": {
                "membership": "leave"
              },
              "origin_server_ts": 1777399279402,
              "sender": "@andrewm:element.io",
              "state_key": "@andrewm:element.io",
              "type": "m.room.member",
              "unsigned": {
                "age": 0,
                "replaces_state": "$ZrBf3a9-Nk3XvojmAdINjArznS9cgHhF52WxQwozeno",
                "prev_content": {
                  "avatar_url": "mxc://element.io/6130836e26b462a6fe63d4e080dd9d2037490f2b",
                  "displayname": "Andrew Morgan (anoa) {he/him}",
                  "membership": "invite"
                },
                "prev_sender": "@anoa_test:matrix.org"
              },
              "event_id": "$xFTj0wmffLtLTIsi95NsnN63C6ZXauyvozHmcbwl-a4"
            }
          ]
        },
        "account_data": {
          "events": []
        },
        "ephemeral": {
          "events": []
        },
        "unread_notifications": {
          "notification_count": 0,
          "highlight_count": 0
        },
        "summary": {
          "m.joined_member_count": 1,
          "m.invited_member_count": 0
        }
      }
    }
  }
```

both of which appear to be full state. In this an intentional change in (simplified) sliding sync?

This question spawned from me reading [MSC4319: Room member events for invite and knock rooms in the `/sync` response](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4319), which has [a line](https://github.com/zecakeh/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/0c0d7311c1874cd7e7f93ec002ba2af16a5690c0/proposals/4319-room-member-events-for-invite-knock-sync-response.md#:~:text=Although%20it%20is%20not%20considered%20a%20dependency%20of%20this%20MSC) asking for Simplified Sliding Sync to include stripped state for invites and knocks (but not rejections of either).

Author: For the case the user rejects an invite, that user should see the room come down sliding sync as stripped state. The other participants of the room will see the full leave event (as they're in the room).

We need the room to be in the "stripped" state case as the local server may be participating in the room and so doesn't have access to all the data anyway (and likely shouldn't leak it even if it did).

It also means if we send down an invite rejection down a sync that hadn't previously seen the room, we can correctly show the leave with the stripped state.

1. <del>The request `required_state` field is a bit confusing and uses special strings (like `"*"` and `"$LAZY"`).</del>
1. Duplication between room response `heroes` and `required_state` when specifying `lazy_members`, e.g. should we drop
   `heroes` if we are returning membership events?
1. <del>Should the room response include the user's current membership? The client can always request it via
   `required_state`, but that may be wasted if the client doesn't need any other information from the member event.</del>
1. Should we remove the `highlight_count` and `notification_count` fields, given clients increasingly must calculate
   this themselves, and Synapse currently doesn't implement it nor does Element X use it.
1. Should we support subscribing to rooms the user is not a member of, i.e. peeking for world readable rooms.
1. Should we support timeline filtering?
1. <del>Should we move `pos`, and other URL params, into the request body? This would allow web clients to cache the CORS
   requests, rather than having to pre-flight each request.</del>
1. How do we make it so that the clients don't have to send up the same body each time?

## Changelog

> Changes from the initial implementation of simplified sliding sync.

Reviewer 14: I kinda misunderstood what this actually meant, so:

```suggestion
Differences from the experimental implementation of simplified sliding sync in Synapse v1.151.0.
```

(Or pick some alternative release or wording).

1. The room has either never been sent to the client on that connection before, or there have been updates to the room
   since the last time it was sent to the client.

This MSC specifies two types of rule: a "list" and a "subscription".

Each rule also specifies a "room config", used to configure what data to return for a room that matches the rule. The
"room config" has two fields: the `timeline_limit` and `required_state`. The `timeline_limit` specifies the maximum
number of events to return in the timeline section of a room, and the `required_state` specifies what state to return.

### Lists

Lists are the primary way of specifying the rooms the client is interested in. They operate against a sequence of rooms
for the user that the server maintains. This server list is, for each user, the set of rooms that the user either
joined, been invited, knocked on, left, or been kicked or banned from, sorted by recent activity (see below for exact
ordering semantics).

Note that rooms the user has been banned from, but never joined, should not be part of the list.

Rooms that the user has been in but left are only included if the room was previously sent to the client in that

> connection. Rooms the user has been kicked or banned from will always be included in the server list. We do not include

Reviewer 26: This seems a potential performance bottleneck -- if an account's been `banned/kicked` from hundreds or thousands of rooms, the server still has to load and sort all of them? Just to figure out the active window, on every single long-polling request.

If top-level `membership` becomes required and authoritative for returned rooms, that at least removes one reason to keep dragging archived rooms back into active list calculations just to recover missed leaves/bans after a disconnect.

I'd still be curious in follow-up work to see if `SlidingRoomFilter` could grow a `memberships` array (`filters: { memberships: ["join", "invite"] }`) so clients can opt out of `banned/kicked` rooms unless they explicitly open an archived view.

still include kicked and banned rooms as a) this should be uncommon, and b) the user may not have seen that they've been
kicked/banned from the room otherwise.

A "list" is then a set of filters (e.g. only match invites, or DM rooms, etc) plus a "range" that indexes into the
*filtered* list of rooms. For example, a common list config would be no filters (i.e. all rooms) plus the range
`[0,19]`, which would cause the server to return the top 20 rooms (by activity).

Specifically, a room matches a given list if, after filtering the server-maintained list of rooms by the list's filters,
the room's index in the filtered list is within the list's range.

#### Activity ordering

Rooms are ordered by last activity, based on when the last event in the room was received by the server. The exact
ordering is determined by the server implementation. (Typically, this would be essentially based on when the server
received the last event in the room, however the precise definition depends on the server architecture, especially for
servers that are "distributed").

This makes it simpler for clients to track what rooms are up-to-date when using a range like `[0,19]`, since all events

> will cause the room to bubble to the top of the list. If it was based on e.g. `bump_stamp` then clients would need to

Reviewer 17: While playing with tuning EX's sync perf, i'm hit this and i'm not convinced it's the right behaviour.

Some apps will indeed want the proposed roomlist to be ordered based on whatever had most recent activity (whether that activity was visible or not) - e.g. a bot.

Others (like EX) i suspect really *do* want the roomlist to be ordered based on bumpstamp - i.e. the server's best guess as to a room list ordering based on the rooms' most recent visible events.  This is because the client will then reorder the rooms once it knows the actual most recent visible event, and we want the jumping around when that happens to be minimised.

Therefore, in a future MSC, I really suggest we allow the client to give a hint on how it wants the room list to be ordered - be that by activity (most recent event timestamp), or bumpstamp (i.e. visible activity: approximate most-recently-visible-event timestamps), or even alphabetically.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit of [deja-vu](https://matrix.to/#/!cnVVNLKqgUzNTOFQkz:matrix.org/$67tPYJyarhZF0aesrx9KeutEhi_Fr4S8PU3o5uPZgBo?via=element.io&via=matrix.org&via=one.ems.host) as we had a similar internal discussion from 2024-07-03 and then a slightly more clear [discussion](https://matrix.to/#/!cnVVNLKqgUzNTOFQkz:matrix.org/$1pIuczy8owjGbWfA3GY6vEvtWOiwKwVhLXzMWb2kYfk?via=element.io&via=matrix.org&via=one.ems.host) on 2024-07-04.

My conclusion back then was that it makes sense to keep sorting the room list by most recent activity so clients receive all new events. But @ara4n had the same thoughts being presented now about the room list jumping around. The conclusion at the time was that we needed to just try it out and could iterate based on that.

There are trade-offs to both sides. Thinking about it more now:

A room's `bump_stamp` is always the same or lower than its most recent activity position, never higher. And the rooms where those two positions differ most are big public rooms with lots of join/leave churn but few messages (exactly the rooms a user has a lot of and cares least about). Encrypted rooms barely diverge, since the server can't tell an encrypted reaction from an encrypted message and counts both as bump events.

If we're using the growing pagination strategy suggested in the MSC:

### Most recent activity ordering

You ask for `[0,19]`. The server gives you the 20 rooms with the most recent anything. Several slots go to Matrix HQ and similar, which are at the top only because people joined and left, and whose last actual message was three days ago. You sort those 20 rooms by `bump_stamp` and draw them. Matrix HQ lands at 14. Fine so far.

You ask for `[0,39]`. Twenty more rooms arrive. One of them is a book club room where someone posted a message twenty minutes ago but which had no other traffic, so it wasn't in the first page. It inserts at position 2, and everything below shifts down a row. This can continue until you grow to paginate the entire list.

The benefit of this strategy is that if something happened in a room, the client knows about it. Someone redacts a message in an old project room you last used a month ago, that room jumps to position 0 and gets sent to you. You're never showing stale data.

### `bump_stamp` ordering

You ask for `[0,19]`. You get the 20 rooms with the most recent bump events which is already correct for the room list.

You ask for `[0,39]`. The next 20 rooms all have older `bump_stamp` events than everything you already have, so they all land below the existing list. The top doesn't move. Keep expanding and the top still doesn't move. The list grows downward and never reshuffles (mostly).

There's still some jitter for end-to-end encrypted rooms, because the client re-sorts once it decrypts and finds that the opaque bump event was actually a reaction. But that only ever pushes a room further down. Even more jitter, if the client has to keep paginating the timeline further to find a relevant bump event.

The downside of this strategy is that the old project room where someone just redacted a message sits at bump position 4000 and stays there. It never enters your window, so the server never sends you the redaction, so you keep displaying a message that no longer exists. Same for a room being renamed, getting a new avatar, being tombstoned, or someone joining. Rooms outside your window quietly rot, and you have no way to know it happened.

### Perhaps both?

If we allowed setting which order you want on a per-list basis, you could have a list for updates and a list for room-list ordering.

But even better:

Perhaps for any new room ("first time the server is sending this [room] on this connection") returned down sync, we use `bump_stamp` but otherwise sort by most recent activity.

In the context of the examples I gave above, the book club room now arrives in the first page, because it's ranked by `bump_stamp`. Matrix HQ doesn't squat a slot. And the redaction in the month-old project room still arrives, because that room has been sent and is therefore ranked by most recent activity.

For example with Synapse, we would implement the sort by checking for `HaveSentRoomFlag.NEVER` for each room and use `bump_stamp` otherwise `stream_ordering` of the room's most recent event.

fetch the full room list before being able to determine updates.

> [!Important]

> > Rooms are ***not*** ordered by "`bump_stamp`", a field returned in the room response.

Reviewer 17: why? stating this unilaterally without justification feels very strange, especially when bump_stamp exists for the purposes of... ordering rooms.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. I tried to get this clarified earlier in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186#discussion_r2376696659 but nothing came of it.

in the events to be returned, then the server handles the change specially, as follows.

#### Changes to `timeline_limit`

Normally the timeline events returned are only the events that have been received since the last time the room was sent
to the client (i.e. only new events). However, if the `timeline_limit` has increased (to say `N`) and the server has not
previously sent down all of the latest `N` events on the connection, the server SHOULD send down the latest `N` events
even if *some* of the events have previously been sent. If the server does not know if it has sent down all events it
SHOULD send down the latest `N` events.

For example, say the latest events in the room are `A`, `B`, `C` and `D` (from earliest to latest), and the client has
previously seen `B`, `C` and `D` with a `timeline_limit` of 1. If the client increases the `timeline_limit` to 4 then
the server SHOULD return `A`, `B`, `C` and `D`. If the client instead increased `timeline_limit` to 3, then the server
would not need to return any events as it knows the client already saw `B`, `C` and `D`.

If the server does return events that predate the last time the room was sent to the client, it MUST set the

> `expanded_timeline` to `true`. (Note that one could infer this from `num_live`, however it is better to be explicit).

Reviewer 26: This seems difficult for the server to accurately maintain and track.

To detect a `timeline_limit` *increase*, the server is forced to heavily cache previous configs for each client request. If the server loses track, the client receives no historic events.

Given the removal of "sticky" lists (per Changelog item 10), **clients** should pass an explicit flag (e.g., `expand_timeline: true`) to intentionally grow the window. Otherwise, we're forcing the server to memorize past requests and run a precarious diff... just to figure out if the limit went up.

the server will return the membership events for:
1. All the `senders` of events in `timeline`, excluding membership events that were previously returned. This
   ensures that the client can render all the timeline events without having to fetch more events from the server.
1. The target (i.e. `state_key`) of all membership events in `timeline`, excluding membership events previously
   returned.
1. All membership updates since the last sync when `limited` is false (i.e. non-gappy syncs). This allows the client to
   cache the membership list without requiring the server to send all membership updates for large gaps. Caching is
   useful as it reduces the frequency that clients have to fetch the full membership list from the server, which needs
   to happen e.g. to send an encrypted message to the room. Note that clients can't rely on seeing membership changes in
   the `timeline` section to keep the current state up-to-date, due to state resolution.

   Note that the fact that membership updates are *not* necessarily sent when `limited` is true means that clients must

>    flush any "membership" cache when `limited` is true. This is in contrast to Synapse's implementation of lazy-loading

Reviewer 21: Thanks for adding the [`pos`-ownership requirement](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/3695caadd9d7e6b93f2ab4087c0bf6bf1ed16544/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L675-L679). One more for Security considerations, on the membership-cache flush in the [lazy-loading section](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/3695caadd9d7e6b93f2ab4087c0bf6bf1ed16544/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L306).

The text says that because [membership updates are not necessarily sent when `limited` is true](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/3695caadd9d7e6b93f2ab4087c0bf6bf1ed16544/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L332-L333), clients must flush any membership cache on a `limited` response, and it gives the reason that cache exists: a client needs the membership list ["to send an encrypted message to the room"](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/3695caadd9d7e6b93f2ab4087c0bf6bf1ed16544/proposals/4186-simplified-sliding-sync.md?plain=1#L329). Putting those together, the flush has an E2EE consequence the Security section does not call out. After a gappy sync a client has dropped its membership list, and if it sends an encrypted message before refetching it (or if the refetch races the send), it computes the recipient set over a stale member set and can miss a member who joined during the gap, so that member's devices cannot decrypt.

This is the room-membership axis, which this MSC mandates, and it is distinct from device-list change delivery (handled by the e2ee extension[^e2ee-ext]): a client with perfectly tracked device lists can still miss a recipient if its membership list is stale, and neither this section nor the e2ee extension analyzes that interaction. It seems worth Security considerations noting that after a `limited` response a client must refetch the membership list (not merely invalidate it) before using it as an encryption recipient set.

[^e2ee-ext]: MSC3884 (Sliding Sync Extension: E2EE); its Security considerations section adds nothing beyond `/sync`: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/5ff5682b114354577dad775dd2d9b653cf531f0f/proposals/3884-sliding-sync-e2ee.md?plain=1#L81-L83

                "is_dm": true
            },
        }
    },
    // Room Subscriptions API
    "room_subscriptions": {
        "!sub1:bar": {
            "required_state": { "include": [{}] },
            "timeline_limit": 10,
        }
    }
}
```

## Response Body

### Top-level

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `pos` | `string` | Yes | The next position token in the sliding window to request. |
| `lists` | `{string: SyncListResult}` | No | A map of list key to list results. |
| `rooms` | `{string: RoomResult}` | No | A map of room ID to room results. |
| `extensions` | `{string: ExtensionResult}` | No | A map of extension key to extension results. Different extensions have different result formats. |

### `SyncListResult`

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `count` | `int` | Yes | The total number of entries in the list, i.e. the number of rooms that match the `filters` but ignoring the `range` |

### `RoomResult`

Not all fields will be returned depending on the user's membership in the room.

All fields in this section may be omitted. When `initial` is set to `false` then an omitted field means that the field

> remains unchanged from its previous value. When `initial` is set to `true` then an omitted field means that the field is

Reviewer 26: Line 465 seems to have a delta-sync disconnect with line 479.

If `initial: false`, then any *omitted* field can be assumed unchanged (line 465). But line 479 says omitting `lists` means the room dropped out of all lists (and is only in the payload due to a subscription).

A single JSON omission *can't* mean "unchanged" and "empty" at once. If a room legitimately drops out, the server MUST return an explicit empty array (`"lists": []`). We need strict key omission to universally signify a lack of change across the board.

not set, e.g. if `initial` is `true` and `name` is not set then the room has no name. Care must be taken by clients to
ensure that if they previously saw that the room had a `name`, then it MUST be cleared if it receives a room response
with `initial: true` and no `name` field.

#### Common fields

These fields are common to all `RoomResult` values. Further fields may be included depending on the user's `membership`, and
are defined below.

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | No | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). <br/><br/> Multiple rooms MAY have the same `bump_stamp`, though servers SHOULD aim for this to be rare and indicate that rooms had recent activity at the same time. It is up to the client to decide on an appropriate tie break. The non-uniqueness is to allow servers to use timestamps, where there is no *guarantee* that events aren't processed at the same timestamp. <br/><br/> If omitted, the `bump_stamp` has not changed. |

Reviewer 26: To avoid clients and servers disagreeing on tie-breaks and possibly duplicating events on the boundary (or missing them entirely), it seems a deterministic tie breaker, i.e., lexicographically by `room_id`, is needed.

Also, `bump_stamp` never exceeds `2^53 - 1` (which could happen if they use nanoseconds).

> | `bump_stamp` | `int` | No | An integer that can be used to sort rooms based on the last "proper" activity in the room. Greater means more recent. <br/><br/> "Proper" activity is defined as an event being received is one of the following types: `m.room.create`, `m.room.message`, `m.room.encrypted`, `m.sticker`, `m.call.invite`, `m.poll.start`, `m.beacon_info`. <br/><br/> For rooms that the user is not currently joined to, this instead represents when the relevant membership happened, e.g. when the user left the room. <br/><br/> The exact value of `bump_stamp` is opaque to the client, a server may use e.g. an auto-incrementing integer, a timestamp, etc. <br/><br/> The `bump_stamp` may decrease in subsequent responses, if e.g. an event was redacted/removed (or purged in cases of retention policies). <br/><br/> Multiple rooms MAY have the same `bump_stamp`, though servers SHOULD aim for this to be rare and indicate that rooms had recent activity at the same time. It is up to the client to decide on an appropriate tie break. The non-uniqueness is to allow servers to use timestamps, where there is no *guarantee* that events aren't processed at the same timestamp. <br/><br/> If omitted, the `bump_stamp` has not changed. |

Reviewer 17: I still find it hard to wrap my head around bumpstamp.  Perhaps a better description (when we come to actually spec it) would be "An order key which reflects the server's best guess of visible activity in a room, useful as a first pass for ordering rooms in the client for rooms where the client has yet to calculate an accurate most-recent-visible-event".

And perhaps a better name would be approximate_visible_activity_order_key - although honestly weird jargon like bump_stamp is probably good enough assuming it is sufficiently well defined.

> | `membership` | `string` | No | The current membership of the user, or omitted if the does not a have a membership event in the room (for peeking). |

Reviewer 26: I noticed Erik's comment above about clients dropping connections and missing "Left" rooms (*"I'm not really sure what we can do about that in this API shape TBH"*).

This ties into a data-retention issue recently reported. If a server purges old `m.room.member` events (`banned` / `left` rooms), it can't populate the user in the `required_state`. Since the top-level membership field is optional, clients (like `matrix-rust-sdk`) might guess and default to `join`. That can resurrect dead rooms.

Could `membership` just be REQUIRED and authoritative for every returned room where the server knows the user's current or historical membership (`join/leave/invite/ban`)? It seems like this should only be omitted for true peeking / no-membership cases. Servers can populate it from internal membership tables instead of digging up potentially-purged events.

That'd also fix Erik's edge case above: on a connection reset, a client passes its known rooms into `room_subscriptions`, and if they were `banned/kicked` elsewhere, the subscription comes back with an authoritative `membership` instead of relying on `required_state` inference or full list pagination to rediscover it.

| `lists` | `[string]` | No | The name of the lists that match this room. The field is omitted if it doesn't match any list and is included only due to a subscription. |

#### Currently or previously joined rooms

When a user is or has been in the room, the following field are also returned:

| Name | Type | Required | Comment |
| - | - | - | - |
| `name` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room name. `null` if room name has been removed c.f. https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#mroomname |
| `avatar` | `[string \| null]` | No | Room avatar. `null` if avatar has been removed. |

> | `heroes` | `[Hero]` | No | A truncated list of users in the room that can be used to calculate the room name. Will first include joined users, then invited users, and then finally left users: the same users as the `m.heroes` section in the [`/v3/sync` specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync_response-200_roomsummary).<br/><br/>When using lazy-loaded membership filter, the membership events of the heroes may or may not also appear in the `required_state`.<br/><br/> Heroes are only included if the room name is not set. |

Reviewer 26: To handle deleted state, the MSC adds a `StateStub` object that only has `type` / `state_key` (no `content`). Parsing `[Event | StateStub]` in strongly-typed languages (Rust, or `mypy`-strict Python) is tedious/error-prone. Could we explore alternatives here?

Matrix already has a way to represent cleared state: an event with an empty `content: {}`; could we drop `StateStub` and use that instead, so client parsers don't need a special case?

`timeline_limit` of 1. This returns quickly with the top 20 rooms (or just the changes in the top 20 rooms if a token
was specified).

The client then increases the range (in the next request) to `[0, 99]`, which will return the next 80 rooms. Note: the
range here matches 100 rooms, however we only send the 80 rooms that we didn't send down in the previous request.

The client can use room subscriptions, with a `timeline_limit` of 20, to preload history for the top rooms. This means
that if the user clicks on one of the top rooms the app can immediately display a screen's worth of history. (An
alternative would be to have a second list with a static range of `[0, 19]` and a `timeline_limit` of 20. The downside
is that the clients may use a different order for the room list and so always fetching extra events for the top 20 rooms
may return more data than required.)

The client can keep increasing the list range in increments to pull in the full list of rooms. The client uses the
returned `count` for the list to know when to stop expanding the list.

The client *may* decide to reduce the range back to `[0, 19]` (and then subsequently incrementally expand the range):

> this can be done.

Reviewer 17: "this can be done?" @erikjohnston is this a truncated sentence fragment or just redundant wording or...?

before being applied.

The fields are combined by taking the "superset", i.e.:
- `timeline_limit` — take the maximum timeline limit across all room configs.
- `required_state` — take the union of the required state fields, i.e. if a state event would be returned by any room
  config it is returned by the combined room config. The combined config has `lazy_members` set to true if and only if

>   any of the configs have `lazy_members` set to true.

Reviewer 14: shouldn't this be "*all* of the configs have `lazy_members` set to true", given we are trying to derive the superset, and setting `lazy_members` means we return less data?

Author: Argh, hmm. I think we want:
1. If any room config requests all member events without lazy, i.e. `include: {type: "m.room.member"}` then we include all room members regardless of whether `lazy` is specified anywhere.
2. Otherwise, if any lazy is set, then we'll always include lazy members.
3. Otherwise, no members are returned.

Maybe the right way forwards is `lazy_members` always implies adding memberships. To better support the common case (where you want lazy members and all other state), we say that setting `lazy` implicitly adds an `exclude: {type: "m.room.member"}` ?

Reviewer 14: > To better support the common case (where you want lazy members and all other state), we say that setting `lazy` implicitly adds an `exclude: {type: "m.room.member"}` ?

I don't really understand what you're suggesting. `exclude: {type: "m.room.member"}` would mean we don't get any memberships at all. Did you mean `include`?

Author: Yeah, I don't think the thing about an implicit `exclude` makes much sense.

I've tried to clarify the behaviour in a854b1fe.

But fundamentally I think we need to handle two typical cases where we combine a lazy members config with one without:
1. Combining with a config that includes all state should combine to return all state (i.e. no lazy loading behaviour)
2. Combining with a config that does not return any membership should combine to one with lazy loading behaviour.
